An injury is damage to your body. It is a general term that refers to harm caused by accidents, falls , hits, weapons, and more. In the U.S., millions of people injure themselves every year. These injuries range from minor to life-threatening. Injuries can happen at work or play , indoors or outdoors, driving a car, or walking across the street. Wounds are injuries that break the skin or other body tissues.   They include cuts, scrapes, scratches, and punctured skin. They often happen because of an accident, but surgery, sutures, and stitches also cause wounds. Minor wounds usually aren't serious, but it is important to clean them. Serious and infected wounds may require first aid followed by a visit to your doctor. You should also seek attention if the wound is deep, you cannot close it yourself, you cannot stop the bleeding or get the dirt out, or it does not heal. Other common types of injuries include: Animal bites Bruises Burns Dislocations Electrical injuries Fractures (broken bones) Sprains and strains

Falls can be dangerous at any age. Babies and young children can get hurt falling off furniture or down the stairs. Older children may fall off playground equipment. For older adults, falls can be especially serious. They are at higher risk of falling. They are also more likely to fracture (break) a bone when they fall, especially if they have osteoporosis . A broken bone, especially when it is in a hip , may even lead to disability and a loss of independence for older adults. Some common causes of falls include: Balance problems Some medicines, which can make you feel dizzy, confused, or slow Vision problems Alcohol, which can affect your balance and reflexes Muscle weakness, especially in your legs, which can make it harder for you to get up from a chair or keep your balance when walking on an uneven surface. Certain illnesses, such as low blood pressure , diabetes , and neuropathy Slow reflexes, which make it hard to keep your balance or move out of the way of a hazard Tripping or slipping due to loss of footing or traction At any age, people can make changes to lower their risk of falling. It important to take care of your health, including getting regular eye exams . Regular exercise may lower your risk of falls by strengthening your muscles, improving your balance, and keeping your bones strong. And you can look for ways to make your house safer. For example, you can get rid of tripping hazards and make sure that you have rails on the stairs and in the bath. To reduce the chances of breaking a bone if you do fall, make sure that you get enough calcium and vitamin D . NIH: National Institute on Aging

A fracture is a break, usually in a bone. If the broken bone punctures the skin, it is called an open or compound fracture. Fractures commonly happen because of car accidents, falls , or sports injuries .  Other causes are low bone density and osteoporosis , which cause weakening of the bones. Overuse can cause stress fractures, which are very small cracks in the bone. Symptoms of a fracture are: Intense pain Deformity - the limb looks out of place Swelling, bruising, or tenderness around the injury Numbness and tingling Problems moving a limb You need to get medical care right away for any fracture. An x-ray can tell if your bone is broken. You may need to wear a cast or splint. Sometimes you need surgery to put in plates, pins or screws to keep the bone in place.

Osteoporosis is a disease that thins and weakens the bones. Your bones become fragile and fracture (break) easily, especially the bones in the hip, spine, and wrist. In the United States, millions of people either already have osteoporosis or are at high risk due to low bone mass. Anyone can develop osteoporosis, but it is more common in older women. Risk factors include: Getting older Being small and thin Having a family history of osteoporosis Taking certain medicines Being a white or Asian woman Having low bone density Osteoporosis is a silent disease. You might not know you have it until you break a bone. A bone mineral density test is the best way to check your bone health. To keep bones strong, eat a diet rich in calcium and vitamin D , exercise, and do not smoke. If needed, medicines can also help. It is also important to try to avoid falling down . Falls are the number one cause of fractures in older adults. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases

Your hip is the joint where your femur (thigh bone) meets your pelvis (hip bone). There are two main parts: a ball at the end of the femur, which fits in a socket in the pelvis. Your hip is known as a ball-and-socket joint. This is because you have a ball at the end of your femur, and it fits into a socket in your pelvis. This makes your hips very stable and allows for a wide range of motion. When they are healthy, it takes great force to hurt them. However, playing sports, running, overuse, or falling can sometimes lead to hip injuries such as: Strains Bursitis Dislocations Fractures (broken bones) Certain diseases also lead to hip injuries or problems. Osteoarthritis can cause pain 
and limited motion. Osteoporosis of the hip causes weak bones that break easily. Both of 
these are common in older people. Another problem is hip dysplasia, where the ball at the end of the femur is loose in the hip socket. It can cause hip dislocation. Babies who have hip dysplasia are usually born with it, but sometimes they develop it later. Treatment for hip disorders may include rest, medicines, physical therapy, or surgery, including hip replacement .

Have you ever felt dizzy , lightheaded, or as if the room is spinning around you? If the feeling happens often, it could be a sign of a balance problem. Balance problems can make you feel unsteady. You may also have blurred vision, confusion, and disorientation. They are one cause of falls and fall-related injuries, such as a hip fracture (broken hip). Some balance problems are due to problems in the inner ear. Others may involve another part of the body, such as the brain or the heart. Aging, infections, head injury, certain medicines, or problems with blood circulation may also cause balance problems. It is important to see your doctor about balance problems. They can be a sign of other health problems, such as an ear infection or a stroke. Your doctor may send you to a specialist for a diagnosis. You may need a hearing test, blood tests, or imaging studies of your head and brain. Other possible tests look at your eye movements, and how your body responds to movement. In some cases, treating the illness that is causing the disorder will help with the balance problem. Exercises, a change in diet, and some medicines also can help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

If you have low vision, eyeglasses, contact lenses, medicine, or surgery may not help. Activities like reading, shopping, cooking, writing, and watching TV may be hard to do.   The leading causes of low vision and blindness in the United States are age-related eye diseases: macular degeneration , cataract and glaucoma .  Other eye disorders , eye injuries , and birth defects can also cause vision loss. Whatever the cause, lost vision cannot be restored. It can, however, be managed. A loss of vision means that you may have to reorganize your life and learn new ways of doing things. If you have some vision, visual aids such as special glasses and large print books can make life easier. There are also devices to help those with no vision, like text-reading software and braille books. The sooner vision loss or eye disease is found and treated, the greater your chances of keeping your remaining vision. You should have regular comprehensive eye exams by an eye care professional. NIH: National Eye Institute

You've probably heard that high blood pressure is a problem. Sometimes blood pressure that is too low can also cause problems. Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps out blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is the diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually they're written one above or before the other, such as 120/80. If your blood pressure reading is 90/60 or lower, you have low blood pressure. Some people have low blood pressure all the time. They have no symptoms and their low readings are normal for them. In other people, blood pressure drops below normal because of a medical condition or certain medicines. Some people may have symptoms of low blood pressure when standing up too quickly.  Low blood pressure is a problem only if it causes dizziness , fainting or in extreme cases, shock . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy.  With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin.  With type 2 diabetes , the more common type, your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. You can also have prediabetes .  This means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes.  Having prediabetes puts you at a higher risk of getting type 2 diabetes. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious problems .    It can damage your eyes , kidneys , and nerves . Diabetes can also cause heart disease , stroke and even the need to remove a limb. Pregnant women can also get diabetes, called gestational diabetes . Blood tests can show if you have diabetes. One type of test, the A1C , can also check on how you are managing your diabetes. Exercise, weight control and sticking to your meal plan can help control your diabetes. You should also monitor your blood glucose level and take medicine if prescribed. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your peripheral nerves are the ones outside your brain and spinal cord. Like static on a telephone line, peripheral nerve disorders distort or interrupt the messages between the brain and the rest of the body. There are more than 100 kinds of peripheral nerve disorders. They can affect one nerve or many nerves. Some are the result of other diseases, like diabetic nerve problems . Others, like Guillain-Barre syndrome , happen after a virus infection. Still others are from nerve compression, like carpal tunnel syndrome or thoracic outlet syndrome . In some cases, like complex regional pain syndrome and brachial plexus injuries , the problem begins after an injury. Some people are born with peripheral nerve disorders. Symptoms often start gradually, and then get worse. They include : Numbness Pain Burning or tingling Muscle weakness Sensitivity to touch Treatment aims to treat any underlying problem, reduce pain and control symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Your eyes are an important part of your health. Most people rely on their eyes to see and make sense of the world around them. But some eye diseases can lead to vision loss , so it is important to identify and treat eye diseases as early as possible. You should get your eyes checked as often as your health care provider recommends it, or if you have any new vision problems. And just as it is important to keep your body healthy, you also need to keep your eyes healthy. Eye Care Tips There are things you can do to help keep your eyes healthy and make sure you are seeing your best: Eat a healthy, balanced diet. Your diet should include plenty or fruits and vegetables, especially deep yellow and green leafy vegetables. Eating fish high in omega-3 fatty acids, such as salmon, tuna, and halibut can also help your eyes. Maintain a healthy weight. Being overweight or having obesity increases your risk of developing diabetes. Having diabetes puts you at higher risk of getting diabetic retinopathy or glaucoma . Get regular exercise. Exercise may help to prevent or control diabetes, high blood pressure, and high cholesterol. These diseases can lead to some eye or vision problems. So if you exercise regularly, you can lower your risk of getting these eye and vision problems. Wear sunglasses. Sun exposure can damage your eyes and raise your risk of cataracts and age-related macular degeneration . Protect your eyes by using sunglasses that block out 99 to 100% of both UV-A and UV-B radiation. Wear protective eye wear. To prevent eye injuries , you need eye protection when playing certain sports, working in jobs such as factory work and construction, and doing repairs or projects in your home. Avoid smoking. Smoking increases the risk of developing age-related eye diseases such as macular degeneration and cataracts and can damage the optic nerve . Know your family medical history. Some eye diseases are inherited, so it is important to find out whether anyone in your family has had them. This can help you determine if you are at higher risk of developing an eye disease. Know your other risk factors. As you get older, you are at higher risk of developing age-related eye diseases and conditions. It is important to know you risk factors because you may be able to lower your risk by changing some behaviors. If you wear contacts, take steps to prevent eye infections. Wash your hands well before you put in or take out your contact lenses. Also follow the instructions on how to properly clean them, and replace them when needed. Give your eyes a rest. If you spend a lot of time using a computer, you can forget to blink your eyes and your eyes can get tired. To reduce eyestrain, try the 20-20-20 rule: Every 20 minutes, look away about 20 feet in front of you for 20 seconds. Eye Tests and Exams Everyone needs to have their eyesight tested to check for vision and eye problems. Children usually have vision screening in school or at their health care provider's office during a checkup. Adults may also get vision screenings during their checkups. But many adults need more than a vision screening. They need a comprehensive dilated eye exam. Getting comprehensive dilated eye exams is especially important because some eye diseases may not have warning signs. The exams are the only way to detect these diseases in their early stages, when they are easier to treat. The exam includes several tests: A visual field test to measure your side (peripheral) vision. A loss of peripheral vision may be a sign of glaucoma. A visual acuity test, where you read an eye chart about 20 feet away, to check on how well you see at various distances Tonometry, which measures your eye's interior pressure. It helps to detect glaucoma. Dilation, which involves getting eye drops that dilate (widen) your pupils. This allows more light to enter the eye. Your eye care provider examines your eyes using a special magnifying lens. This provides a clear view of important tissues at the back of your eye, including the retina , macula, and optic nerve. If you have a refractive error and are going to need glasses or contacts , then you will also have a refraction test. When you have this test, you look through a device that has lenses of different strengths to help your eye care professional figure out which lenses will give you the clearest vision. At what age you should start getting these exams and how often you need them depends on many factors. They include your age, race, and overall health.  For example, if you are African American, you are at higher risk of glaucoma and you need to start getting the exams earlier. If you have diabetes, you should get an exam every year. Check with your health care provider about if and when you need these exams.

You have more calcium in your body than any other mineral. Calcium has many important jobs. The body stores more than 99% of its calcium in the bones and teeth to help make and keep them strong. The rest is throughout the body in blood, muscle and the fluid between cells. Your body needs calcium to help muscles and blood vessels contract and expand, to secrete hormones and enzymes and to send messages through the nervous system. It is important to get plenty of calcium in the foods you eat. Foods rich in calcium include: Dairy products such as milk, cheese, and yogurt Leafy, green vegetables Fish with soft bones that you eat, such as canned sardines and salmon Calcium-enriched foods such as breakfast cereals, fruit juices, soy and rice drinks, and tofu. Check the product labels. The exact amount of calcium you need depends on your age and other factors. Growing children and teenagers need more calcium than young adults. Older women need plenty of calcium to prevent osteoporosis . People who do not eat enough high-calcium foods should take a calcium supplement. NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements

Vitamins are substances that your body needs to grow and develop normally. Vitamin D helps your body absorb calcium . Calcium is one of the main building blocks of bone. A lack of vitamin D can lead to bone diseases such as osteoporosis or rickets .  Vitamin D also has a role in your nerve, muscle, and immune systems. You can get vitamin D in three ways: through your skin, from your diet, and from supplements. Your body forms vitamin D naturally after exposure to sunlight. However, too much sun exposure can lead to skin aging and skin cancer.  So many people try to get their vitamin D from other sources. Vitamin D-rich foods include egg yolks, saltwater fish, and liver.  Some other foods, like milk and cereal, often have added vitamin D. You can also take vitamin D supplements.  Check with your health care provider to see how much you should take.  People who might need extra vitamin D include: Older adults Breastfed infants People with dark skin People with  certain conditions, such as liver diseases, cystic fibrosis and Crohn's disease People who have obesity or have had gastric bypass surgery NIH: National Institutes of Health Office of Dietary Supplements



Falls can be a serious problem in the hospital. Factors that increase the risk of falls include: Poor lighting Slippery floors Equipment in rooms and hallways that gets in the way Being weak from illness or surgery Being in new surroundings Hospital staff often do not see patients fall. But falls require attention right away to lessen the risk of injury.If you are with a patient when they begin to fall: Use your body to break the fall. Protect your own back by keeping your feet wide apart and your knees bent. Make sure the patient's head does not hit the floor or any other surface.

Older adults and people with medical problems are at risk of falling or tripping. This can result in broken bones or more serious injuries. The bathroom is a place in the home where falls often happen. Making changes in your bathroom helps lower your risk of falling.Staying safe in the bathroom is important for people with joint pain, muscle weakness, or physical disability. If you have any of these issues, you will need to take precaution in your bathroom. Remove all floor coverings and anything that blocks the entry.

If you have a medical problem or you are an older adult, you may be at risk of falling or tripping. This can result in broken bones or even more serious injuries. Exercising can help prevent falls because it can: Make your muscles stronger and more flexible Improve your balance Increase how long you can be active You can do the following exercises anytime and almost anywhere. As you get stronger, try to hold each position longer or add light weights to your ankles. This will increase how effective the exercise is. Try to exercise 150 minutes a week. Perform muscle strengthening exercises 2 or more days a week. Start off slowly and check with your health care provider to make sure you are doing the right type of exercises for you. You may want to exercise on your own or join a group. When you exercise, always make sure you breathe slowly and easily. Do not hold your breath.You can do some balance exercises during everyday activities. While waiting in line at the store, try balancing on one foot. Try sitting down and standing up without using your hands.

Older adults and people with medical problems are at risk of falling or tripping. This can result in broken bones or more serious injuries. Use the tips below to make changes in the home to prevent falls.Falls can happen anywhere. This includes inside and outside the home. Take action to prevent falls, such as setting up a safe home, avoiding things that can cause falls, and exercising to build strength and balance.

Many people with medical problems are at risk of falling or tripping. This can leave you with broken bones or more serious injuries. You can do many things to make your home safer for you to prevent falls . Below are questions you may want to ask your health care provider to help keep your home safe for you.Am I taking any medicines that will make me sleepy, dizzy, or lightheaded? Are there exercises I can do to make me stronger or improve my balance to help prevent falls? Where in my home do I need to make sure there is enough light? How can I make my bathroom safer? Do I need a shower chair? Do I need a raised toilet seat? Do I need help when I take a shower or bath? Do I need bars on the walls in the shower, by the toilet, or in the hallways? Is my bed low enough? Do I need a hospital bed? Do I need a bed on the first floor so I do not need to climb stairs? How can I make the stairs at my house safer? Is it OK to have pets in the home? What are other things that I may trip over? What can I do about any uneven floors? Do I need help with cleaning, cooking, laundry, or other household chores? Should I use a cane or a walker? What should I do if I fall? How can I keep my phone near me? Should I purchase a medical alert system to call for help if I fall?











Occupational health problems occur at work or because of the kind of work you do. These problems can include: Cuts, fractures (broken bones), and sprains and strains Loss of limbs Repetitive motion disorders Hearing problems caused by exposure to noise Vision problems Illness caused by breathing, touching, or swallowing unsafe substances Illness caused by exposure to radiation Exposure to germs in health care settings Good job safety and prevention practices can reduce your risk of these problems. Try to stay fit, reduce stress, set up your work area properly, and use the right equipment and gear.



A sprain is a stretched or torn ligament. Ligaments are tissues that connect bones at a joint. Falling, twisting, or getting hit can all cause a sprain. Ankle and wrist sprains are common. Symptoms include pain, swelling, bruising, and being unable to move your joint. You might feel a pop or tear when the injury happens. A strain is a stretched or torn muscle or tendon. Tendons are tissues that connect muscle to bone. Twisting or pulling these tissues can cause a strain. Strains can happen suddenly or develop over time. Back and hamstring muscle strains are common. Many people get strains playing sports. Symptoms include pain, muscle spasms, swelling, and trouble moving the muscle. At first, treatment of both sprains and strains usually involves resting the injured area, icing it, wearing a bandage or device that compresses the area, and medicines. Later treatment might include exercise and physical therapy. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

People can lose all or part of an arm or leg for a number of reasons. Common ones include: Problems with blood circulation. These may be the result of atherosclerosis or diabetes. Severe cases may result in amputation. Injuries, including from traffic accidents and military combat Cancer Birth defects Some amputees have phantom pain, which is the feeling of pain in the missing limb. Other physical problems include surgical complications and skin problems, if you wear an artificial limb. Many amputees use an artificial limb . Learning how to use it takes time. Physical therapy can help you adapt. Recovery from the loss of a limb can be hard. Sadness, anger, and frustration are common.  If you are having a tough time, talk to your doctor. Treatment with medicine or counseling can help.

It's frustrating to be unable to hear well enough to enjoy talking with friends or family. Hearing disorders make it hard, but not impossible, to hear. They can often be helped. Deafness can keep you from hearing sound at all. What causes hearing loss? Some possibilities are: Heredity Diseases such as ear infections and meningitis Trauma Certain medicines Long-term exposure to loud noise Aging There are two main types of hearing loss. One happens when your inner ear or auditory nerve is damaged. This type is usually permanent. The other kind happens when sound waves cannot reach your inner ear. Earwax buildup, fluid, or a punctured eardrum can cause it. Treatment or surgery can often reverse this kind of hearing loss. Untreated, hearing problems can get worse. If you have trouble hearing, you can get help. Possible treatments include hearing aids , cochlear implants , special training, certain medicines, and surgery. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

Noise is all around you, from televisions and radios to lawn mowers and washing machines.  Normally, you hear these sounds at safe levels that don't affect hearing. But sounds that are too loud or loud sounds over a long time are harmful.  They can damage sensitive structures of the inner ear and cause noise-induced hearing loss. More than 30 million Americans are exposed to hazardous sound levels on a regular basis.  Hazardous sound levels are louder than 80 decibels. That's not as loud as traffic on a busy street. Listening to loud music, especially on headphones, is a common cause of noise-induced hearing loss.  You can protect your hearing by: Keeping the volume down when listening to music Wearing earplugs when using loud equipment NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders



What is radiation? Radiation is energy. It travels in the form of energy waves or high-speed particles. Radiation can occur naturally or be man-made. There are two types: Non-ionizing radiation, which includes radio waves, cell phones, microwaves, infrared radiation and visible light Ionizing radiation, which includes ultraviolet radiation, radon , x-rays , and gamma rays What are the sources of radiation exposure? Background radiation is all around us all the time. Most of it forms naturally from minerals. These radioactive minerals are in the ground, soil, water, and even our bodies. Background radiation can also come from outer space and the sun. Other sources are man-made, such as x-rays, radiation therapy to treat cancer, and electrical power lines. What are the health effects of radiation exposure? Radiation has been around us throughout our evolution. So our bodies are designed to deal with the low levels we're exposed to every day. But too much radiation can damage tissues by changing cell structure and damaging DNA. This can cause serious health problems, including cancer. The amount of damage that exposure to radiation can cause depends on several factors, including: The type of radiation The dose (amount) of radiation How you were exposed, such as through skin contact, swallowing or breathing it in, or having rays pass through your body Where the radiation concentrates in the body and how long it stays there How sensitive your body is to radiation. A fetus is most vulnerable to the effects of radiation. Infants, children, older adults, pregnant women, and people with compromised immune systems are more vulnerable to health effects than healthy adults. Being exposed to a lot of radiation over a short period of time, such as from a radiation emergency , can cause skin burns . It may also lead to acute radiation syndrome (ARS, or "radiation sickness").  The symptoms of ARS include headache and diarrhea. They usually start within hours. Those symptoms will go away and the person will seem healthy for a little while. But then they will get sick again. How soon they get sick again, which symptoms they have, and how sick they get depends on the amount of radiation they received. In some cases, ARS causes death in the following days or weeks. Exposure to low levels of radiation in the environment does not cause immediate health effects. But it can slightly increase your overall risk of cancer. What are the treatments for acute radiation sickness? Before they start treatment, health care professionals need to figure out how much radiation your body absorbed. They will ask about your symptoms, do blood tests, and may use a device that measures radiation. They also try get more information about the exposure, such as what type of radiation it was, how far away you were from the source of the radiation, and how long you were exposed. Treatment focuses on reducing and treating infections, preventing dehydration , and treating injuries and burns. Some people may need treatments that help the bone marrow recover its function. If you were exposed to certain types of radiation, your provider may give you a treatment that limits or removes the contamination that is inside your body. You may also get treatments for your symptoms. How can radiation exposure be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent or reduce radiation exposure: If your health care provider recommends a test that uses radiation, ask about its risks and benefits. In some cases, you may be able to have a different test that does not use radiation. But if you do need a test that uses radiation, do some research into the local imaging facilities. Find one that monitors and uses techniques to reduce the doses they are giving patients. Reduce electromagnetic radiation exposure from your cell phone. At this time, scientific evidence has not found a link between cell phone use and health problems in humans. More research is needed to be sure. But if you still have concerns, you can reduce how much time you spend on your phone. You can also use speaker mode or a headset to place more distance between your head and the cell phone. If you live in a house, test the radon levels, and if you need to, get a radon reduction system. During a radiation emergency, get inside a building to take shelter. Stay inside, with all of the windows and doors shut. Stay tuned to and follow the advice of emergency responders and officials. Environmental Protection Agency

Health care workers are exposed to many job hazards. These can include : Infections Needle injuries Back injuries Allergy-causing substances Violence Stress Follow good job safety and injury prevention practices. They can reduce your risk of health problems. Use protective equipment, follow infection control guidelines, learn the right way to lift heavy objects, and find ways to manage stress. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health

Ergonomics looks at what kind of work you do, what tools you use and your whole job environment.  The aim is to find the best fit between you and your job conditions. Examples of ergonomic changes to your work might include: Adjusting the position of your computer keyboard to prevent carpal tunnel syndrome Being sure that the height of your desk chair allows your feet to rest flat on floor Learning the right way to lift heavy objects to prevent back injuries Using handle coatings or special gloves to suppress vibrations from power tools Making sure that you have good posture in whatever you do, whether it is sitting in front of a computer, standing at a checkout, or walking around a warehouse No matter what the job is, the goal is to make sure that you are safe, comfortable, and less prone to work-related injuries.



To help prevent reinjuring your back at work, or hurting it in the first place, follow the tips below. Learn how to lift the right way and make changes at work, if needed.Exercise helps to prevent future back pain: Exercise a little every day. Walking is a good way to keep your heart healthy and your muscles strong. If walking is too hard for you, work with a physical therapist to develop an exercise plan that you can do. Keep doing the exercises you have been shown to strengthen your core muscles, which support your back. A stronger core helps lower your risk for further back injuries. If you are overweight, ask your health care provider about ways you can lose some weight. Carrying around extra weight adds stress to your back no matter what kind of work you do. Long car rides and getting in and out of the car can be hard on your back. If you have a long commute to work, consider some of these changes: Adjust your car seat to make it easier to enter, sit in, and get out of your car. Bring your seat as far forward as possible to avoid bending forward when you are driving. If you drive long distances, stop and walk around every hour. Do not lift heavy objects right after a long car ride.

Byssinosis is a disease of the lungs. It is caused by breathing in cotton dust or dusts from other vegetable fibers such as flax, hemp, or sisal while at work.Breathing in (inhaling) the dust produced by raw cotton can cause byssinosis. It is most common in people who work in the textile industry. Those who are sensitive to the dust can have an asthma-like condition after being exposed. Methods of prevention in the United States have reduced the number of cases. Byssinosis is still common in developing countries. Smoking increases risk of developing this disease. Being exposed to the dust many times can lead to long-term (chronic) lung disease.

Rheumatoid pneumoconiosis (RP, also known as Caplan syndrome) is swelling (inflammation) and scarring of the lungs. It occurs in people with rheumatoid arthritis who have breathed in dust, such as from coal ( coal worker's pneumoconiosis ) or silica .RP is caused by breathing in inorganic dust. This is dust that comes from grinding metals, minerals, or rock. After the dust enters the lungs, it causes inflammation. This can lead to the formation of many small lumps in the lungs and an airway disease similar to mild asthma. It is not clear how RP develops. There are two theories: When people breathe in inorganic dust, it affects their immune system and leads to rheumatoid arthritis (RA). RA is an autoimmune disease in which the body's immune system attacks healthy body tissue by mistake. When people who already have RA or are at high risk for it are exposed to mineral dust, they develop RP.

Coal worker's pneumoconiosis (CWP) is a lung disease that results from breathing in dust from coal, graphite, or man-made carbon over a long time. CWP is also known as black lung disease.CWP occurs in two forms: simple and complicated (also called progressive massive fibrosis, or PMF). Your risk for developing CWP depends on how long you have been around coal dust. Most people with this disease are older than 50. Smoking does not increase your risk for developing this disease, but it may have an added harmful effect on the lungs. If CWP occurs with rheumatoid arthritis , it is called Caplan syndrome .

Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is inflammation of the lungs due to breathing in a foreign substance, usually certain types of dust, fungus, or molds.Hypersensitivity pneumonitis usually occurs in people who work in places where there are high levels of organic dusts, fungus, or molds. Long-term exposure can lead to lung inflammation and acute lung disease . Over time, the acute condition turns into long-lasting (chronic) lung disease. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis may also be caused by fungi or bacteria in humidifiers, heating systems, and air conditioners found in homes and offices. Exposure to certain chemicals, such as isocyanates or acid anhydrides, can also lead to hypersensitivity pneumonitis. Examples of hypersensitivity pneumonitis include: Bird fancier's lung: This is the most common type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis. It is caused by repeated or intense exposure to proteins found in the feathers or droppings of many species of birds. Farmer's lung: This type of hypersensitivity pneumonitis is caused by exposure to dust from moldy hay, straw, and grain.

Industrial bronchitis is swelling (inflammation) of the large airways of the lungs that occurs in some people who work around certain dusts, fumes, smoke, or other substances.Exposure to dusts, fumes, strong acids, and other chemicals in the air causes this type of bronchitis. Smoking may also contribute. You may be at risk if you are exposed to dusts that contain: Asbestos Coal Cotton Flax Latex Metals Silica Talc Toluene diisocyanate Western red cedar

Occupational asthma is a lung disorder in which substances found in the workplace cause the airways of the lungs to swell and narrow. This leads to attacks of wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness, and coughing.Asthma is caused by inflammation (swelling) in the airways of the lungs. When an asthma attack occurs, the lining of the air passages swells and the muscles surrounding the airways activate. This makes the airways narrower and reduces the amount of air that can pass through. In people who have sensitive airways, asthma symptoms can be triggered by breathing in substances called triggers. Many substances in the workplace can trigger asthma symptoms, leading to occupational asthma. The most common triggers are wood dust, grain dust, animal dander, fungi, or chemicals. The following workers are at higher risk: Bakers Detergent manufacturers Drug manufacturers Farmers Grain elevator workers Laboratory workers (especially those working with laboratory animals) Metal workers Millers Plastics workers Woodworkers

Occupational hearing loss is damage to the inner ear from noise or vibrations due to certain types of jobs.Over time, repeated exposure to loud noise and music can cause hearing loss. Watch this video about: Hearing and the cochlea Sounds above 80 decibels (dB, a measurement of the loudness or strength of sound vibration) may cause vibrations intense enough to damage the inner ear. This is more likely to happen if the sound continues for a long time. 90 dB -- a large truck 5 yards (4.5 meters) away (motorcycles, snowmobiles, and similar engines range from 85 to 90 dB) 100 dB -- some rock concerts 120 dB -- a jackhammer about 3 feet (1 meter) away 130 dB -- a jet engine from 100 feet (30 meters) away A general rule of thumb is that if you need to shout to be heard, the sound is in the range that can damage hearing. Some jobs carry a high risk for hearing loss , such as: Airline ground maintenance Construction Farming Jobs involving loud music or machinery Military jobs that involve combat, aircraft noise, or other loud noise posts In the United States, laws regulate the maximum job noise exposure that it is allowed. Both the length of exposure and decibel level are considered. If the sound is at or greater than the maximum levels recommended, you need to take steps to protect your hearing.

Most women who are pregnant can keep working during their pregnancy. Some women are able to work right up until they are ready to deliver. Others may need to cut back on their hours or stop working before their due date. Whether you can work or not depends on: Your health The health of the baby The type of job you have Below are some factors that affect your ability to work.If your job requires heavy lifting, you may need to stop working or reduce your work hours. Most women are advised to only lift things that weigh under 20 pounds (9 kilograms) during pregnancy. Repetitively lifting heavier objects often causes back injury or disability.

Silicosis is a lung disease caused by breathing in (inhaling) silica dust.Silica is a common, naturally-occurring crystal. It is found in most rock beds. Silica dust forms during mining, quarrying, tunneling, and working with certain metal ores. Silica is a main part of sand, so glass workers and sand-blasters are also exposed to silica. Three types of silicosis occur: Chronic silicosis, which results from long-term exposure (more than 20 years) to low amounts of silica dust. The silica dust causes swelling in the lungs and chest lymph nodes. This disease may cause people to have trouble breathing. This is the most common form of silicosis. Accelerated silicosis, which occurs after exposure to larger amounts of silica over a shorter period of time (5 to 15 years). Swelling in the lungs and symptoms occur faster than in simple silicosis. Acute silicosis, which results from short-term exposure to very large amounts of silica. The lungs become very inflamed and can fill with fluid, causing severe shortness of breath and a low blood oxygen level. People who work in jobs where they are exposed to silica dust are at risk. These jobs include: Abrasives manufacturing Glass manufacturing Mining Quarrying Road and building construction Sand blasting Stone cutting Intense exposure to silica can cause disease within a year. But it usually takes at least 10 to 15 years of exposure before symptoms occur. Silicosis has become less common since the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) created regulations requiring the use of protective equipment, which limits the amount of silica dust workers inhale.

You're working at your desk, trying to ignore the tingling or numbness you've had for some time in your hand and wrist . Suddenly, a sharp, piercing pain shoots through the wrist and up your arm. Just a passing cramp? It could be carpal tunnel syndrome. The carpal tunnel is a narrow passageway of ligament and bones at the base of your hand. It contains nerve and tendons. Sometimes, thickening from irritated tendons or other swelling narrows the tunnel and causes the nerve to be compressed. Symptoms usually start gradually. As they worsen, grasping objects can become difficult. Often, the cause is having a smaller carpal tunnel than other people do. Other causes include performing assembly line work, wrist injury, or swelling due to certain diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Women are three times more likely to have carpal tunnel syndrome than men. Early diagnosis and treatment are important to prevent permanent nerve damage. Your doctor diagnoses carpal tunnel syndrome with a physical exam and special nerve tests.  Treatment includes resting your hand, splints, pain and anti-inflammatory medicines, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke









Exercising is good for you, but sometimes you can injure yourself when you play sports or exercise. Accidents, poor training practices, or improper gear can cause them. Some people get hurt because they are not in shape. Not warming up or stretching enough can also lead to injuries. The most common sports injuries are: Sprains and strains Knee injuries Swollen muscles Achilles tendon injuries Pain along the shin bone Rotator cuff injuries Fractures (broken bones) Dislocations If you get hurt, stop playing. Continuing to play or exercise can cause more harm.  Treatment often begins with the RICE (Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation) method to relieve pain, reduce swelling, and speed healing. Other possible treatments include pain relievers, keeping the injured area from moving, rehabilitation, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases



Your knee joint is made up of bone, cartilage, ligaments and fluid. Muscles and tendons help the knee joint move. When any of these structures is hurt or diseased, you have knee problems. Knee problems can cause pain and difficulty walking. Knee problems are very common, and they occur in people of all ages. Knee problems can interfere with many things, from participation in sports to simply getting up from a chair and walking. This can have a big impact on your life. The most common disease affecting the knee is osteoarthritis . The cartilage in the knee gradually wears away, causing pain and swelling. Injuries to ligaments and tendons also cause knee problems. A common injury is to the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL). You usually injure your ACL by a sudden twisting motion. ACL and other knee injuries are common sports injuries . Treatment of knee problems depends on the cause. In some cases your doctor may recommend knee replacement . NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

What is a rotator cuff? Your rotator cuff is part of your shoulder joint . It's a group of muscles and tendons that holds the top part of your upper arm bone firmly in your shoulder socket. The rotator cuff keeps your shoulder stable when you move your arm in any direction. What are rotator cuff injuries? Rotator cuff injuries are common. Most of them are wear-and-tear injuries from doing the same arm movements over and over - especially reaching over your head. With time, the tissues in the rotator cuff break down, leading to these injuries: Tendinitis . The tendons in the rotator cuff connect your muscles to your shoulder bones. In tendinitis, the tendons become irritated and swollen from being pinched during shoulder movements. Bursitis . The bursa is a small, fluid-filled sac that pads the space between the rotator cuff and the bones of your shoulder. Bursitis happens when the muscle and bone rub the bursa too much. It swells with extra fluid, which causes pain Rotator cuff tears. Tears in a rotator cuff tendon can happen over time or suddenly from an injury, such as falling on an outstretched arm or lifting something heavy. A tear may go part way through a tendon (partial tear) or all the way through (full tear). Who is more likely to develop a rotator cuff injury? Anyone can develop a rotator cuff injury. But certain people are more likely to have one: People over age 40. Most rotator cuff injuries are from the wear and tear of aging. By age 80, most adults have tears. Athletes. Playing sports with repeated shoulder movements increases the risk of a rotator cuff injury, for example, tennis, swimming, and baseball - especially pitching. People in jobs that require a lot of reaching overhead or heavy lifting. Carpenters, construction workers, and painters are examples of workers who may be more likely to have rotator cuff problems. What are the symptoms of rotator cuff injuries? Rotator cuff injuries don't always cause pain.  But when they do, the pain is often in the top part of your arm or shoulder. You may feel more pain when you: Lie down, especially on the injured shoulder Lift your arm or lower it to the front or side Reach behind your back Other symptoms from a torn rotator cuff may include: Loss of strength in the arm Clicking or popping sounds when you move your arm How are rotator cuff injuries diagnosed? To find out if you have a rotator cuff injury, your health care provider: Will examine your shoulder. This includes checking the range of motion and where the pain is. Will test your arm and shoulder strength. May order imaging tests , such as x-rays , an ultrasound , or an MRI scan . What are the treatments for rotator cuff injuries? The best treatment for you depends on your age, how much your injury bothers you, and whether your injury was sudden or happened from wear and tear. Treatments for rotator cuff injuries often include: Rest Putting ice or a cold pack on the sore area Pain relievers to lessen pain and swelling, such as ibuprofen or aspirin Physical therapy exercises to strengthen your shoulder and improve movement A corticosteroid shot into your shoulder joint if other treatments don't help with the pain Treatments for rotator cuff tendinitis and bursitis may also include ultrasound therapy. Surgery may be an option if your shoulder doesn't feel better in 6 to 12 months. Treatments for a torn rotator cuff may also include heat to the sore area or electrical stimulation of the nerves and muscles (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation, TENS). You provider may suggest surgery if your tear is large or is from a recent injury, or symptoms last for 6 to 12 months. When should I see a health care provider for shoulder pain? If certain activities bother your shoulder, it's best to stop doing them and check with your provider. That's because early treatment can prevent mild rotator cuff injuries from becoming more serious later on. If you your arm feels weak right after a sudden injury to your shoulder, see your provider as soon as possible.



Dislocations are joint injuries that force the ends of your bones out of position. The cause is often a fall or a blow, sometimes from playing a contact sport . You can dislocate your ankles, knees, shoulders , hips, elbows and jaw. You can also dislocate your finger and toe joints. Dislocated joints often are swollen, very painful and visibly out of place. You may not be able to move it. A dislocated joint is an emergency.  If you have one, seek medical attention. Treatment depends on which joint you dislocate and the severity of the injury. It might include manipulations to reposition your bones, medicine, a splint or sling, and rehabilitation. When properly repositioned, a joint will usually function and move normally again in a few weeks. Once you dislocate a shoulder or kneecap, you are more likely to dislocate it again. Wearing protective gear during sports may help prevent dislocations.



Your Achilles tendon joins your calf muscle to your heel. You can tear your Achilles tendon if you land hard on your heel during sports, from a jump, when accelerating, or when stepping into a hole. Surgery to repair the Achilles tendon is done if your Achilles tendon has been torn into 2 pieces.To fix your torn Achilles tendon, the surgeon will: Make a cut down the back of your heel Make several small cuts rather than one large cut After that, the surgeon will: Bring the ends of your tendon together Sew the ends together Stitch the wound closed

ACL reconstruction is surgery to reconstruct the ligament in the center of your knee. The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) connects your shin bone (tibia) to your thigh bone (femur). A tear of this ligament can cause your knee to give way during physical activity, most often during side-step or crossover movements.Most people have general anesthesia right before surgery. This means you will be asleep and pain-free. Other kinds of anesthesia, like regional anesthesia or a block, may also be used for this surgery. The tissue to replace your damaged ACL will come from your own body or from a donor. A donor is a person who has died and chose to give all or part of their body to help others. Tissue taken from your own body is called an autograft. The most common places to take tissue from are the knee cap tendon, quadriceps tendon, or hamstring tendon. Your hamstrings are the muscles behind your knee. Tissue taken from a donor is called an allograft or cadaver graft. The procedure is usually performed with the help of knee arthroscopy . With arthroscopy, a tiny camera is inserted into the knee through a small surgical cut. The camera is connected to a video monitor in the operating room. Your surgeon will use the camera to check the ligaments and other tissues of your knee. Your surgeon will make other small cuts around your knee and insert other medical instruments. Your surgeon will fix any other damage found, and then will replace your ACL by following these steps: The torn ligament will be removed with a shaver or other instruments. If your own tissue is being used to make your new ACL, your surgeon will make a larger cut. Then, the autograft will be removed through this cut. Your surgeon will make tunnels in your bone to bring the new tissue through. This new tissue will be put at the same place as your old ACL. Your surgeon will attach the new ligament to the bone with screws or other devices to hold it in place. As it heals, the bone tunnels fill in. This holds the new ligament in place. At the end of the surgery, your surgeon will close your cuts with sutures (stitches) and cover the area with a dressing. You may be able to view pictures after the procedure of what the doctor saw and what was done during the surgery.

Acute mountain sickness is an illness that can affect mountain climbers, hikers, skiers, or travelers at high altitudes, usually above 8000 feet (2400 meters).Acute mountain sickness is caused by reduced air pressure and lower oxygen levels at high altitudes. The faster you climb to a high altitude, the more likely you will get acute mountain sickness. The best way to prevent altitude illness is to ascend gradually. It is a good idea to spend a few days ascending to 9850 feet (3000). Above this point ascend very slowly so that the elevation at which you sleep does not increase more than 990 feet to 1640 feet (300m to 500m) per night. You are at higher risk for acute mountain sickness if: You live at or near sea level and travel to a high altitude. You have had the illness before. You ascend quickly. You have not acclimatized to the altitude. Alcohol or other substances have interfered with acclimatization. You have medical problems involving the heart, nervous system, or lungs.

Getting plenty of exercise and playing sports is good for overall health. It also adds pleasure and a sense of well-being. Almost any sport places some stress on your spine. That is why it's important to keep the muscles and ligaments that support your spine flexible and strong. A healthy spine can help prevent many sports injuries. Getting these muscles to the point where they support your spine well is called core strengthening. Ask your health care provider or physical therapist about these strengthening exercises. If you had a back injury, talk with your provider about keeping your back safe when you return to sports .Although bicycling strengthens the muscles of your legs, it does not do much for the muscles around your spine. Bending your lower spine forward while arching your upper back for long periods can strain your back and neck muscles. Mountain biking on uneven surfaces can cause jarring and sudden compressions (squeezing) on the spine. Tips to help make bicycling easier on your back include: Avoid mountain biking. Ride a bike that fits you properly. Staff at a good bike shop can help you get fitted. Remember not only to push down on the pedals, but also to pull up on them. Wear biking gloves and use a handlebar cover to reduce jarring in your upper body. Put shock absorbers on the front wheel. A more upright bike can have less pressure on your lower back and neck. Recumbent bikes place less stress on your back and neck. The muscles that bring your leg up toward your abdomen are called flexors. They are used a lot when you ride a bicycle. Keeping these muscles stretched out is important because it will help keep the proper balance in the muscles around your spine and hips.



Regular exercise is good for your body and safe for most everyone. However, with any type of activity, there is a chance you can get hurt. Exercise injuries can range from strains and sprains to back pain . With a little planning, you can prevent injury and stay safe during exercise.Some of the most common causes of exercise injuries include: Exercising before your body has warmed up Repeating the same motion over and over again Not having proper form for your exercise Not resting in between workouts Pushing your body too hard or too quickly Doing an exercise that is too strenuous for your level of fitness Not using proper equipment

Lactic acidosis refers to lactic acid build up in the bloodstream. Lactic acid is produced when oxygen levels become low in cells within the areas of the body where metabolism takes place.The most common cause of lactic acidosis is severe medical illness in which blood pressure is low and too little oxygen is reaching the body's tissues. Intense exercise or convulsions can cause temporary lactic acidosis. Certain diseases can also cause the condition, including: AIDS Alcoholism Cancer Cirrhosis Cyanide poisoning Kidney failure Respiratory failure Sepsis (severe infection) Some medicines can rarely cause lactic acidosis: Beta adrenergic agonist inhalers used to treat asthma or COPD (albuterol and salmeterol) Epinephrine Linezolid Metformin, used to treat diabetes (most often when overdosed) Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors used to treat HIV infection Propofol

Medial epicondylitis is soreness or pain on the inside of the lower arm near the elbow. It is commonly called golfer’s elbow.The part of the muscle that attaches to a bone is called a tendon. Some of the muscles in your forearm attach to the bone on the inside of your elbow. When you use these muscles over and over again, small tears develop in the tendons. Over time, this leads to irritation and pain where the tendon is attached to the bone. The injury can occur from using poor form or overdoing certain sports, such as: Golf Baseball and other throwing sports, such as football and javelin Racquet sports, such as tennis Weight training Repeated twisting of the wrist (such as when using a screwdriver) can lead to golfer's elbow. People in certain jobs may be more likely to develop it, such as: Painters Plumbers Construction workers Cooks Assembly-line workers Computer users Butchers

Osgood-Schlatter disease is a painful swelling of the bump on the upper part of the shinbone, just below the knee. This bump is called the anterior tibial tubercle.Osgood-Schlatter disease is thought to be caused by small injuries to the knee area from overuse before the knee is finished growing. The quadriceps muscle is a large, strong muscle on the front part of the upper leg. When this muscle squeezes (contracts), it straightens the knee. The quadriceps muscle is an important muscle for running, jumping, and climbing. When the quadriceps muscle is used a lot in sports activities during a child's growth spurt, this area becomes irritated or swollen and causes pain. It is common in adolescents who play soccer, basketball, and volleyball, and who participate in gymnastics. Osgood-Schlatter disease affects more boys than girls.

You may play sports rarely, on a regular basis, or at a competitive level. No matter how involved you are, consider these questions before returning to any sport after a back injury : Do you want to still play the sport, even though it stresses your back? If you continue with the sport, will you continue at the same level or play at a less intense level? When did your back injury occur? How severe was the injury? Did you need surgery? Have you talked about wanting to return to the sport with your doctor, physical therapist, or other health care providers? Have you been doing exercises to strengthen and stretch the muscles that support your back? Are you still in good shape? Are you pain free when you do the movements your sport requires? Have you regained all or most of the range of motion in your spine?Back injury - returning to sports; Sciatica - returning to sports; Herniated disc - returning to sports; Herniated disk - returning to sports; Spinal stenosis - returning to sports; Back pain - returning to sports

The rotator cuff is a group of muscles and tendons that attach to the bones of the shoulder joint, allowing the shoulder to move and keeping it stable. Rotator cuff tendinitis refers to irritation of these tendons and inflammation of the bursa (a normally smooth layer) lining these tendons. A rotator cuff tear occurs when one of the tendons is torn from the bone from overuse or injury.The shoulder joint is a ball and socket type joint. The top part of the arm bone (humerus) forms a joint with the shoulder blade (scapula). The rotator cuff holds the head of the humerus into the scapula. It also controls movement of the shoulder joint. TENDINITIS The tendons of the rotator cuff pass underneath a bony area on their way to attaching the top part of the arm bone. When these tendons become inflamed, they can become more inflamed over this area during shoulder movements. Sometimes, a bone spur narrows the space even more. Rotator cuff tendinitis is also called impingement syndrome. Causes of this condition include: Keeping the arm in the same position for long periods, such as doing computer work or hairstyling Sleeping on the same arm each night Playing sports requiring the arm to be moved overhead repeatedly such as in tennis, baseball (particularly pitching), swimming, and lifting weights overhead Working with the arm overhead for many hours or days, such as in painting and carpentry Poor posture over many years Aging Rotator cuff tears TEARS Rotator cuff tears may occur in two ways: A sudden acute tear may happen when you fall on your arm while it is stretched out. Or, it can occur after a sudden, jerking motion when you try to lift something heavy. A chronic tear of the rotator cuff tendon occurs slowly over time. It is more likely when you have chronic tendinitis or impingement syndrome. At some point, the tendon wears down and tears. There are two types of rotator cuff tears: A partial tear occurs when a tear does not completely sever the attachments to the bone. A complete, full thickness tear means that the tear goes all the way through the tendon. It may be as small as a pinpoint, or the tear may involve the entire tendon. With complete tears, the tendon has come off (detached) from where it was attached to the bone. This kind of tear does not heal on its own.

Shin splints occur when you have pain in the front of your lower leg. The pain of shin splints is from the inflammation of the muscles, tendons, and bone tissue around your shin. Shin splints are a common problem for runners, gymnasts, dancers, and military recruits. However, there are things you can do to heal from shin splints and prevent them from getting worse.Shin splints are an overuse problem. You get shin splints from overloading your leg muscles, tendons or shin bone. Shin splints happen from overuse with too much activity or an increase in training. Most often, the activity is high impact and repetitive exercise of your lower legs. This is why runners, dancers, and gymnasts often get shin splints. Common activities that cause shin splints are: Running, especially on hills. If you are a new runner, you are at greater risk for shin splints. Increasing your days of training. Increasing the intensity of training, or going a longer distance. Doing exercise that has frequent stops and starts, such as dancing, basketball, or military training. You are more at risk for shin splints if you: Have flat feet or a very rigid foot arches. Work out on hard surfaces, such as running on the street or playing basketball or tennis on a hard court. Do not wear the proper shoes. Wear worn out shoes. Running shoes lose over half of their shock absorbing ability after 250 miles (400 kilometers) of use.

Tennis elbow is soreness or pain on the outside (lateral) side of the upper arm near the elbow.The part of the muscle that attaches to a bone is called a tendon. Some of the muscles in your forearm attach to the bone on the outside of your elbow. When you use these muscles over and over again, small tears develop in the tendon. Over time, the tendon cannot heal, and this leads to irritation and pain where the tendon is attached to the bone. This injury is common in people who play a lot of tennis or other racket sports, hence the name "tennis elbow." Backhand is the most common stroke to cause symptoms. But any activity that involves repetitive twisting of the wrist (like using a screwdriver) can lead to this condition. Painters, plumbers, construction workers, cooks, and butchers are all more likely to develop tennis elbow. This condition may also be due to repetitive typing on the computer keyboard and mouse use. People between 35 to 54 years old are commonly affected. Sometimes, there is no known cause of tennis elbow.

Your ankle bone and the ends of your two lower leg bones make up the ankle joint. Your ligaments, which connect bones to one another, stabilize and support it. Your muscles and tendons move it. The most common ankle problems are sprains and fractures (broken bones). A sprain is an injury to the ligaments. It may take a few weeks to many months to heal completely.  A fracture is a break in a bone.  You can also injure other parts of the ankle such as tendons, which join muscles to bone, and cartilage, which cushions your joints. Ankle sprains and fractures are common sports injuries .

A concussion is a type of brain injury .  It involves a short loss of normal brain function. It happens when a hit to the head or body causes your head and brain to move rapidly back and forth. This sudden movement can cause the brain to bounce around or twist in the skull, creating chemical changes in your brain. Sometimes it can also stretch and damage your brain cells. Sometimes people call a concussion a "mild" brain injury. It is important to understand that while concussions may not be life-threatening, they can still be serious. Concussions are a common type of sports injury . Other causes of concussions include blows to the head, bumping your head when you fall, being violently shaken, and car accidents. Symptoms of a concussion may not start right away; they may start days or weeks after the injury. Symptoms may include a headache or neck pain. You may also have nausea, ringing in your ears, dizziness, or tiredness. You may feel dazed or not your normal self for several days or weeks after the injury. Consult your health care professional if any of your symptoms get worse, or if you have more serious symptoms such as: Convulsions or seizures Drowsiness or inability to wake up A headache that gets worse and does not go away Weakness, numbness, or decreased coordination Repeated vomiting or nausea Confusion Slurred speech Loss of consciousness To diagnose a concussion, your health care provider will do a physical exam and will ask about your injury. You will most likely have a neurological exam, which checks your vision, balance, coordination, and reflexes. Your health care provider may also evaluate your memory and thinking. In some cases, you may also have a scan of the brain, such as a CT scan or an MRI . A scan can check for bleeding or inflammation in the brain, as well as a skull fracture (break in the skull). Most people recover fully after a concussion, but it can take some time. Rest is very important after a concussion because it helps the brain to heal. In the very beginning, you may need to limit physical activities or activities that involve a lot of concentration, such as studying, working on the computer, or playing video games. Doing these may cause concussion symptoms (such as headache or tiredness) to come back or get worse. Then when your health care provider says that it is ok, you can start to return to your normal activities slowly. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Your elbow joint is made up of bone, cartilage, ligaments and fluid. Muscles and tendons help the elbow joint move. When any of these structures is hurt or diseased, you have elbow problems. Many things can make your elbow hurt. A common cause is tendinitis , an inflammation or injury to the tendons that attach muscle to bone. Tendinitis of the elbow is a sports injury , often from playing tennis or golf. You may also get tendinitis from overuse of the elbow. Other causes of elbow pain include sprains and strains , fractures (broken bones), dislocations , bursitis , and arthritis . Treatment depends on the cause.

Each of your feet has 26 bones, 33 joints, and more than 100 tendons, muscles, and ligaments. No wonder a lot of things can go wrong. Here are a few common problems: Bunions - hard, painful bumps on the big toe joint Corns and calluses - thickened skin from friction or pressure Plantar warts - warts on the soles of your feet Fallen arches - also called flat feet Ill-fitting shoes often cause these problems. Aging and being overweight also increase your chances of having foot problems.

No matter how old you are or what you do for a living, you are always using your hands. 
When there is something wrong with them, you may not be able to do your regular activities. Hand problems include  : Carpal tunnel syndrome - compression of a nerve as it 
goes through the wrist, often making your fingers feel numb Injuries that result in fractures (broken bones), ruptured ligaments 
and dislocations Osteoarthritis - wear-and-tear arthritis, which can 
also cause deformity Tendinitis - irritation of the tendons Disorders and injuries of your fingers and thumb



Your shoulder joint is composed of three bones: the clavicle (collarbone), the scapula (shoulder blade), and the humerus (upper arm bone). Your shoulders are the most movable joints in your body. They can also be unstable because the ball of the upper arm is larger than the shoulder socket that holds it. To remain in a stable or normal position, the shoulder must be anchored by muscles, tendons, and ligaments. Because your shoulder can be unstable, it can be easily injured. Common problems include: Sprains and strains Dislocations Separations Tendinitis Bursitis Torn rotator cuffs Frozen shoulder Fractures (broken bones) Arthritis Health care providers diagnose shoulder problems by using your medical history, a physical exam, and imaging tests. Often, the first treatment for shoulder problems is RICE. This stands for Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation. Other treatments include exercise and medicines to reduce pain and swelling. If those don't work, you may need surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Sports can be a great way to get in shape or stay that way. Having a specific goal can be a great motivator.  Physically, you need strength and endurance. Your training will vary with your sport. You would not train the same way for pole vaulting as for swimming. You might, however, cross train. Cross training simply means that you include a variety of fitness activities in your program. Research shows that cross training builds stronger bones. Remember to listen to your body. If you frequently feel exhausted or you are in pain, you may be overdoing it. Injuries can be the result. And be sure that you use your body and your equipment safely .  What you eat and drink is also important. Water is the most important nutrient for active people. Drink it before, during and after workouts.









Accidents happen. Someone chokes on an ice cube or gets stung by a bee. It is important to know when to call 911 -- it is for life-threatening emergencies.  While waiting for help to arrive, you may be able to save someone's life. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) is for people whose hearts or breathing has stopped and the Heimlich maneuver is for people who are choking. You can also learn to handle common injuries and wounds . Cuts and scrapes, for example, should be rinsed with cool water. To stop bleeding, apply firm but gentle pressure, using gauze. If blood soaks through, add more gauze, keeping the first layer in place. Continue to apply pressure. It is important to have a first aid kit available.  Keep one at home and one in your car. It should include a first-aid guide.  Read the guide to learn how to use the items, so you are ready in case an emergency happens.

Food or small objects can cause choking if they get caught in your throat and block your airway. This keeps oxygen from getting to your lungs and brain. If your brain goes without oxygen for more than four minutes, you could have brain damage or die. Young children are at an especially high risk of choking. They can choke on foods like hot dogs, nuts and grapes, and on small objects like toy pieces and coins. Keep hazards out of their reach and supervise them when they eat. When someone is choking, quick action can be lifesaving. Learn how to do back blows, the Heimlich maneuver (abdominal thrusts), and CPR .

Most insect bites are harmless, though they sometimes cause discomfort. Bee, wasp, and hornet stings and fire ant bites usually hurt. Mosquito and flea bites usually itch. Insects can also spread diseases. In the United States, some mosquitoes spread West Nile virus . Travelers outside the United States may be at risk for malaria and other infections. To prevent insect bites and their complications: Don't bother insects Use insect repellant Wear protective clothing Be careful when you eat outside because food attracts insects If you know you have severe allergic reactions to insect bites and stings (such as anaphylaxis ), carry an emergency epinephrine kit



When someone's blood flow or breathing stops, seconds count. Permanent brain damage or death can happen quickly. If you know how to perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), you could save a life. CPR is an emergency procedure for a person whose heart has stopped or is no longer breathing.  CPR can maintain circulation and breathing until emergency medical help arrives. Even if you haven't had training, you can do "hands-only" CPR for a teen or adult whose heart has stopped beating ("hands-only" CPR isn't recommended for children).  "Hands-only" CPR uses chest compressions to keep blood circulating until emergency help arrives. If you've had training, you can use chest compressions, clear the airway, and do rescue breathing. Rescue breathing helps get oxygen to the lungs for a person who has stopped breathing.  To keep your skills up, you should repeat the training every two years.





Bleeding is the loss of blood. Bleeding may be: Inside the body (internally) Outside the body (externally) Bleeding may occur: Inside the body when blood leaks from blood vessels or organs Outside the body when blood flows through a natural opening (such as the ear, nose, mouth, vagina, or rectum) Outside the body when blood moves through a break in the skinGet emergency medical help for severe bleeding. This is very important if you think there is internal bleeding. Internal bleeding can very quickly become life threatening. Immediate medical care is needed. Serious injuries may cause heavy bleeding. Sometimes, minor injuries can bleed a lot. An example is a scalp wound. You may bleed a lot if you take blood-thinning medicine or have a bleeding disorder such as hemophilia . Bleeding in such people requires medical attention right away. The most important step for external bleeding is to apply direct pressure. This will likely stop most external bleeding. Always wash your hands before (if possible) and after giving first aid to someone who is bleeding. This helps prevent infection. Try to use latex gloves when treating someone who is bleeding. Latex gloves should be in every first aid kit. People allergic to latex can use nonlatex gloves. You can catch infections, such as viral hepatitis or HIV/AIDS, if you touch infected blood and it gets into an open wound, even a small one. Although puncture wounds usually don't bleed very much, they carry a high risk of infection. Seek medical care to prevent tetanus or other infection. Abdominal, pelvic, groin, neck, and chest wounds can be very serious because of the possibility of severe internal bleeding. They may not look very serious, but can result in shock and death. Seek medical care right away for any abdominal, pelvic, groin, neck, or chest wound. If organs are showing through the wound, do not try to push them back into place. Cover the injury with a moist cloth or bandage. Apply gentle pressure to stop the bleeding in these areas. Blood loss can cause blood to collect under the skin, turning it black and blue (bruised). Apply a cool compress to the area as soon as possible to reduce swelling . Do not place ice directly on the skin. Wrap the ice in a towel first.

Most people take breathing for granted. People with certain illnesses may have breathing problems that they deal with on a regular basis. This article discusses first aid for someone who is having unexpected breathing problems. Breathing difficulties can range from: Being short of breath Being unable to take a deep breath and gasping for air Feeling like you are not getting enough airBreathing difficulty is almost always a medical emergency. An exception is feeling slightly winded from normal activity, such as exercise.

The capillary nail refill test is a quick test done on the nail beds. It is used to monitor dehydration and the amount of blood flow to tissue.Pressure is applied to the nail bed until it turns white. This indicates that the blood has been forced from the tissue under the nail. It is called blanching. Once the tissue has blanched, pressure is removed. While the person holds their hand above their heart, the health care provider measures the time it takes for blood to return to the tissue. Return of blood is indicated by the nail turning back to a pink color.

Cardiogenic shock takes place when the heart has been damaged so much that it is unable to supply enough blood to the organs of the body.The most common causes are serious heart conditions. Many of these occur during or after a heart attack (myocardial infarction). These complications include: A large section of heart muscle that no longer moves well or does not move at all Breaking open (rupture) of the heart muscle due to damage from the heart attack Dangerous heart rhythms, such as ventricular tachycardia , ventricular fibrillation , or supraventricular tachycardia Pressure on the heart due to a buildup of fluid around it (pericardial tamponade) Tear or rupture of the muscles or tendons that support the heart valves, especially the mitral valve Tear or rupture of the wall (septum) between the left and right ventricles (lower heart chambers) Very slow heart rhythm (bradycardia) or problem with the electrical system of the heart (heart block) Cardiogenic shock occurs when the heart is unable to pump as much blood as the body needs. It can happen even if there hasn't been a heart attack if one of these problems occurs and your heart function drops suddenly.

Choking is when someone is having a very hard time breathing because food, a toy, or other object is blocking the throat or windpipe (airway). A choking person's airway may be blocked so that not enough oxygen reaches the lungs. Without oxygen, brain damage can occur in as little as 4 to 6 minutes. Rapid first aid for choking can save a person's life.Choking can be caused by any of the following: Eating too fast, not chewing food well, or eating with dentures that do not fit well Drinking alcohol (even a small amount of alcohol affects awareness) Being unconscious and breathing in vomit Breathing in small objects (young children) Injury to the head and face (for example, swelling, bleeding, or a deformity can cause choking) Swallowing problems after a stroke Enlarging tonsils or tumors of the neck and throat Problems with the esophagus (food pipe or swallowing tube)

Choking is when someone cannot breathe because food, a toy, or other object is blocking the throat or windpipe (airway). This article discusses choking in infants.Choking in infants is usually caused by breathing in a small object that the baby has placed in their mouth, such as a button, coin, balloon, toy part, or watch battery. Choking may result from a complete or partial blockage of the airway. A complete blockage is a medical emergency. A partial blockage can quickly become life threatening if the baby cannot get enough air. When a person does not get enough air, permanent brain damage can occur in as little as 4 minutes. Rapid first aid for choking can save a life.

Choking is when someone cannot breathe because food, a toy, or other object is blocking the throat or windpipe (airway). A choking person's airway may be blocked so that not enough oxygen reaches the lungs. Without oxygen, brain damage can occur in as little as 4 to 6 minutes. Rapid first aid for choking can save a person's life. This article discusses choking in adults or children over age 1 who have lost alertness (are unconscious).Choking may be caused by: Eating too fast, not chewing food well, or eating with dentures that do not fit well Foods such as food chunks, hot dogs, popcorn, peanut butter, sticky or gooey food (marshmallows, gummy bears, dough) Drinking alcohol (even a small amount of alcohol affects awareness) Being unconscious and breathing in vomit Breathing in or swallowing small objects (young children) Injury to the head and face (for example, swelling, bleeding, or a deformity can cause choking) Swallowing problems caused by a stroke or other brain disorders Enlarging tonsils or tumors of the neck and throat Problems with the esophagus (food pipe or swallowing tube)



Drug use is the misuse or overuse of any medicine or drug, including alcohol. This article discusses first aid for drug overdose and withdrawal.Many street drugs don't have treatment benefits. Any use of these drugs is a form of drug abuse. Medicines that are used to treat a health problem can be abused, either accidentally or intentionally. This occurs when people take more than the normal dose. Abuse can also occur if the medicine is taken on purpose with alcohol or other drugs. Drug interactions may also lead to side effects. So, it is important to let your health care provider know about all the drugs you are taking. This includes vitamins and other medicines you bought without a prescription. Many drugs are addictive. Sometimes, the addiction is gradual. And some drugs (such as cocaine ) can cause addiction after only a few doses. Addiction means that a person has a strong urge to use the substance and can’t stop, even if they want to. Someone who has become addicted to a drug usually will have withdrawal symptoms when the drug is suddenly stopped. Treatment can help prevent or lessen withdrawal symptoms. A drug dose that is large enough to cause harm to the body (toxic) is called an overdose. This may occur suddenly, when a large amount of the drug is taken at one time. It may also occur gradually as a drug builds up in the body over a longer period. Prompt medical attention may save the life of someone who has an overdose.

Ear emergencies include objects in the ear canal, ruptured eardrums, sudden hearing loss, and severe infections.Children often put objects into their ears. These objects can be hard to remove. The ear canal is a tube of solid bone that is lined with thin, sensitive skin. Any object pressing against the skin can be very painful. In many cases, a health care provider will need to use special instruments to examine the ear and safely remove the object.

You should make sure that you and your family are prepared to treat common symptoms, injuries, and emergencies. By planning ahead, you can create a well-stocked home first aid kit. Keep all of your supplies in one location so you know exactly where they are when you need them. The following items are basic supplies. You can get most of them at a pharmacy or supermarket. Bandages and dressings: Adhesive bandages (Band-Aid or similar brand); assorted sizes Aluminum finger splints Elastic (ACE) bandage for wrapping wrist, ankle, knee, and elbow injuries Eye shield, pads, and bandages Latex or non-latex gloves to reduce contamination risk Sterile gauze pads, non-stick (Adaptic-type, petrolatum or other) gauze and adhesive tape Triangular bandage for wrapping injuries and making an arm sling Home health equipment: Blue baby bulb or turkey baster suction device Disposable, instant ice bags Face mask to reduce wound contamination risk First-aid manual Hand sanitizer Latex or non-latex gloves to reduce contamination risk Save-A-Tooth storage device in case a tooth is broken or knocked out; contains a travel case and salt solution Sterile cotton balls Sterile cotton-tipped swabs Syringe, medicine cup, or medicine spoon for giving specific doses of medicine Thermometer Tweezers, to remove ticks and small splinters Medicine for cuts and injuries: Antiseptic solution or wipes, such as hydrogen peroxide, povidone-iodine, or chlorhexidine Antibiotic ointment, such as bacitracin, polysporin, or mupirocin Sterile eyewash, such as contact lens saline solution Calamine lotion for stings or poison ivy Hydrocortisone cream, ointment, or lotion for itching Be sure to check your kit regularly. Replace any supplies that are getting low or have expired. Other supplies may be included in a first aid kit. This depends on the area in which you plan to spend time.First aid kit

This article discusses how to remove a fishhook that is stuck in the skin.Fishing accidents are the most common cause of fishhooks stuck in the skin.



Choking is when someone is having a very hard time breathing because food, a toy, or other object is blocking the throat or windpipe (airway). A choking person's airway may be blocked so that not enough oxygen reaches the lungs. Without oxygen, brain damage can occur in as little as 4 to 6 minutes. Rapid first aid for choking can save a person's life. Abdominal thrusts is an emergency technique to help clear someone's airway. The procedure is done on someone who is choking and also conscious . Most experts do not recommend abdominal thrusts for infants less than 1 year old. You can also perform the maneuver yourself .First ask, "Are you choking? Can you speak?" DO NOT perform first aid if the person is coughing forcefully and is able to speak. A strong cough can often dislodge the object. If the person is choking, perform abdominal thrusts as follows: If the person is sitting or standing, position yourself behind the person and reach your arms around his or her waist. For a child, you may have to kneel. Place your fist, thumb side in, just above the person's navel (belly button). Grasp the fist tightly with your other hand. Make quick, upward and inward thrusts with your fist. If the person is lying on his or her back, straddle the person facing the head. Push your grasped fist upward and inward in a movement similar to the one above. You may need to repeat the procedure several times before the object is dislodged. If repeated attempts do not free the airway, call 911 or the local emergency number. If the person loses consciousness, start CPR . If you are not comfortable performing abdominal thrusts, you can perform back blows instead on a person who is choking.

A sling is a device used to support and keep still (immobilize) an injured part of the body. Slings can be used for many different injuries. They are most often used when you have a broken ( fractured ) or dislocated arm or shoulder.If an injury needs a splint , apply the splint first and then apply the sling. Always check the person's skin color and pulse (circulation) after the injured body part has been splinted. Loosen the splint and bandage if: The area becomes cool or turns pale or blue Numbness or tingling develops in the injured body part Injuries to nerves or blood vessels often occur with an arm injury. The health care provider should check circulation, movement, and feeling in the injured area often. The purpose of a splint is to prevent movement of the broken or dislocated bone. Splints reduce pain, and help prevent further damage to muscles, nerves, and blood vessels. Splinting also reduces the risk of a closed injury becoming an open injury (an injury in which bone sticks through the skin).

A splint is a device used for holding a part of the body stable to decrease pain and prevent further injury.After an injury, a splint is used to hold still and protect the wounded body part from further damage until you get medical help. It is important to check for good circulation after the injured body part has been immobilized. Splints can be used for different injuries. For example, with a broken bone, stabilizing the area is important to reduce pain, prevent further injury, and allow the person to move about as much as possible.

Hypovolemic shock is an emergency condition in which severe blood or other fluid loss makes the heart unable to pump enough blood to the body. This type of shock can cause many organs to stop working.Losing about one fifth or more of the normal amount of blood in your body causes hypovolemic shock. Blood loss can be due to: Bleeding from cuts Bleeding from other injuries Internal bleeding, such as in the gastrointestinal tract The amount of circulating blood in your body also may drop when you lose too much body fluid from other causes. This can be due to: Burns Diarrhea Excessive perspiration Vomiting

A laceration is a cut that goes all the way through the skin. A small cut can be cared for at home. A large cut requires immediate medical attention. If the cut is minor, a liquid bandage (liquid adhesive) can be used on the cut to close the wound and help stop bleeding. Using a liquid bandage is quick to apply. It causes only slight burning when applied. Liquid bandages seal the cut closed after only 1 application. There is less chance for infection since the wound is sealed shut. These products are waterproof, so you can shower or bathe without worry. The seal lasts for 5 to 10 days. It will fall off naturally after it has done its job. In some cases after the seal falls off, you can reapply more liquid bandage, but only after seeking medical advice from your health care provider. But most minor cuts will be mostly healed at this point. Using these products may also reduce the size of scars that form at the injury site. Liquid adhesives can be found at your local pharmacy.With clean hands or a clean towel, wash the cut and surrounding area thoroughly with cold water and soap. Dry with a clean towel. Make sure the site is completely dry. The liquid bandage should not be placed inside the wound; it should be placed on top of the skin, where the cut comes together. Create a seal by gently bringing the cut together with your fingers. Apply the liquid bandage over the top of the cut. Spread it from one end of the cut to the other, covering the cut completely. Hold the cut together for about a minute to give the adhesive enough time to dry. Do not use liquid bandage around the eyes, in the ear or nose, or internally in the mouth. If the liquid is accidentally applied to any of these areas call your doctor or provider or local emergency number (such as 911). It is OK to bathe after the liquid adhesive has dried. Try not to scrub the site. Doing so may loosen the seal or even remove the adhesive completely. It is also OK to wash the site with soap and water daily to keep the area clean and prevent infection. Pat the site dry after washing. Do not use any other ointments on the site of the cut. This will weaken the bond and slow the healing process. Do not scratch or scrub the site. This will remove the liquid bandage. Keep the following in mind: Prevent the wound from reopening by keeping activity to a minimum. Make sure your hands are clean when you care for the wound. Take proper care of your wound to help reduce scarring. Call your provider if you have questions or concerns about how to care for stitches or staples at home. You can take pain medicine, such as acetaminophen, as directed for pain at the wound site. Follow-up with your provider to make sure the wound is healing properly.

Poisoning is caused by exposure to a harmful substance. This can be due to swallowing, injecting, breathing in, or other means. Most poisonings occur by accident. Immediate first aid is very important in a poisoning emergency. The first aid you give before getting medical help can save a person's life. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or the local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Millions of poisonings are reported to United States poison control centers every year. Many result in death. It is important to note that just because a package does not have a warning label does not mean a substance is safe. You should consider poisoning if someone suddenly becomes sick for no apparent reason. Poisoning should also be considered if the person is found near a furnace, car, fire, or in an area that is not well ventilated. Symptoms of poisoning may take time to develop. However, if you think someone has been poisoned, DO NOT wait for symptoms to develop. Get medical help right away.

A scrape is an area where the skin is rubbed off. It usually occurs after you fall or hit something. A scrape is often not serious. But it can be painful and may bleed slightly.A scrape is often dirty. Even if you do not see dirt, the scrape can get infected. Take these steps to clean the area thoroughly. Wash your hands. Then wash the scrape thoroughly with mild soap and water. Large pieces of dirt or debris should be removed with tweezers. Clean the tweezers with soap and water before use. If available, apply antibiotic ointment. Apply a non-stick bandage. Change the bandage once or twice a day until the scrape has healed. If the scrape is very small, or on the face or scalp, you can let it air dry.

Shock is a life-threatening condition that occurs when the body is not getting enough blood flow. Lack of blood flow means the cells and organs do not get enough oxygen and nutrients to function properly. Many organs can be damaged as a result. Shock requires immediate treatment and can get worse very rapidly. As many 1 in 5 people in shock will die from it.The main types of shock include: Cardiogenic shock (due to heart problems) Hypovolemic shock (caused by too little blood volume) Anaphylactic shock (caused by allergic reaction) Septic shock (due to infections) Neurogenic shock (caused by damage to the nervous system)

A splinter is a thin piece of material (such as wood, glass, or metal) that gets embedded just below the top layer of your skin.To remove a splinter, first wash your hands with soap and water. Use tweezers to grab the splinter. Carefully pull it out at the same angle it went in. If the splinter is under the skin or hard to grab: Sterilize a pin or needle by soaking it in rubbing alcohol or placing the tip in a flame. Wash your hands with soap. Use the pin to gently remove skin over the splinter. Then use the tip of the pin to lift the end of the splinter out. You may need to use tweezers to pull out the splinter after you lift it. After the splinter is out, wash the area with soap and water. Pat the area dry. (Don't rub.) Apply antibiotic ointment. Bandage the cut if it is likely to get dirty. See your health care provider if there is inflammation or pus, or if the splinter is deeply embedded. Also seek medical attention if the splinter is in your eye or close to it.

Unconsciousness is when a person is unable to respond to people and activities. Doctors often call this a coma or being in a comatose state. Other changes in awareness can occur without becoming unconscious. These are called altered mental status or changed mental status. They include sudden confusion, disorientation, or stupor. Unconsciousness or any other sudden change in mental status must be treated as a medical emergency.Unconsciousness can be caused by nearly any major illness or injury. It can also be caused by substance (drug) and alcohol use. Choking on an object can result in unconsciousness as well. Brief unconsciousness (or fainting ) is often a result from dehydration, low blood sugar , or temporary low blood pressure. It can also be caused by serious heart or nervous system problems. A doctor will determine if the affected person needs tests. Other causes of fainting include straining during a bowel movement (vasovagal syncope), coughing very hard, or breathing very fast (hyperventilating).

Wild animals usually avoid people. They might attack, however, if they feel threatened, are sick, or are protecting their young or territory. Attacks by pets are more common. Animal bites rarely are life-threatening, but if they become infected, you can develop serious medical problems. To prevent animal bites and complications from bites: Never pet, handle, or feed unknown animals Leave snakes alone Watch your children closely around animals Vaccinate your cats, ferrets, and dogs against rabies Spay or neuter your dog to make it less aggressive Get a tetanus booster if you have not had one recently Wear boots and long pants when you are in areas with venomous snakes If an animal bites you, clean the wound with soap and water as soon as possible. Get medical attention if necessary. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

A burn is damage to your body's tissues caused by heat, chemicals, electricity , sunlight , or radiation . Scalds from hot liquids and steam, building fires and flammable liquids and gases are the most common causes of burns. Another kind is an inhalation injury , caused by breathing smoke. There are three types of burns: First-degree burns damage only the outer layer of skin Second-degree burns damage the outer layer and the layer underneath Third-degree burns damage or destroy the deepest layer of skin and tissues underneath Burns can cause swelling, blistering, scarring and, in serious cases, shock , and even death. They also can lead to infections because they damage your skin's protective barrier. Treatment for burns depends on the cause of the burn, how deep it is, and how much of the body it covers. Antibiotic creams can prevent or treat infections.  For more serious burns, treatment may be needed to clean the wound, replace the skin, and make sure the patient has enough fluids and nutrition. NIH: National Institute of General Medical Sciences





Preparing for a disaster can reduce the fear, anxiety and losses that disasters cause. A disaster can be a  natural disaster, like a hurricane , tornado , flood or earthquake . It might also be  man-made, like a bioterrorist attack or chemical spill . You should know the risks and danger signs of different types of disasters. You should also have a disaster plan. Be ready to evacuate your home, and know how to treat basic medical problems. Make sure you have the insurance you need, including special types, like flood insurance. No matter what kind of disaster you experience, it causes emotional distress . After a disaster, recovery can take time. Stay connected to your family and friends during this period. Federal Emergency Management Agency



If you've ever gotten a splinter or had sand in your eye, you've had experience with a foreign body. A foreign body is something that is stuck inside you but isn't supposed to be there. You may inhale or swallow a foreign body, or you may get one from an injury to almost any part of your body.  Foreign bodies are more common in small children, who sometimes stick things in their mouths, ears, and noses. Some foreign bodies, like a small splinter, do not cause serious harm. Inhaled or swallowed foreign bodies may cause choking or bowel obstruction and may require medical care.

Your body normally cools itself by sweating.  During hot weather, especially when it is very humid, sweating just isn't enough to cool you off. Your body temperature can rise to dangerous levels and you can develop a heat illness. Most heat illnesses happen when you stay out in the heat too long. Exercising and working outside in high heat can also lead to heat illness. Older adults, young children, and those who are sick or overweight are most at risk. Taking certain medicines or drinking alcohol can also raise your risk. Heat-related illnesses include: Heat stroke - a life-threatening illness in which body temperature may rise above 106 °F (41 °C) in minutes. Symptoms include dry skin, a rapid, strong pulse, dizziness, nausea, and confusion. If you see any of these signs, get medical help right away. Heat exhaustion -  an illness that can happen after several days of exposure to high temperatures and not enough fluids. Symptoms include heavy sweating, rapid breathing, and a fast, weak pulse. If it is not treated, it can turn into heat stroke. Heat cramps - muscle pains or spasms that happen during heavy exercise. You usually get them in your abdomen, arms, or legs. Heat rash - skin irritation from excessive sweating. It is more common in young children. You can lower your risk of heat illness by drinking fluids to prevent dehydration , replacing lost salt and minerals, and limiting your time in the heat. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Cold weather can affect your body in different ways. You can get frostbite , which is an injury to the body that is caused by freezing. Your body can also lose heat faster than you can produce it. That can cause hypothermia, or abnormally low body temperature. It can make you sleepy, confused, and clumsy. Because it happens gradually and affects your thinking, you may not realize you need help. That makes it especially dangerous. A body temperature below 95 °F (35 °C) is a medical emergency and can lead to death if not treated promptly. Anyone who spends much time outdoors in cold weather can get hypothermia. You can also get it from being cold and wet, or under cold water for too long. Babies and old people are especially at risk. Babies can get it from sleeping in a cold room. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention



Shock happens when not enough blood and oxygen can get to your organs and tissues.  It causes very low blood pressure and may be life-threatening. It often happens along with a serious injury. There are several kinds of shock. Hypovolemic shock happens when you lose a lot of blood or fluids. Causes include internal or external bleeding, dehydration, burns, and severe vomiting and/or diarrhea. Septic shock is caused by infections in the bloodstream. A severe allergic reaction can cause anaphylactic shock . An insect bite or sting might cause it. Cardiogenic shock happens when the heart cannot pump blood effectively. This may happen after a heart attack. Neurogenic shock is caused by damage to the nervous system. Symptoms of shock include: Confusion or lack of alertness Loss of consciousness Sudden and ongoing rapid heartbeat Sweating Pale skin A weak pulse Rapid breathing Decreased or no urine output Cool hands and feet Shock is a life-threatening medical emergency and it is important to get help right away. Treatment of shock depends on the cause. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute









A bruise is a mark on your skin caused by blood trapped under the surface. It happens when an injury crushes small blood vessels but does not break the skin. Those vessels break open and leak blood under the skin. Bruises are often painful and swollen. You can get skin, muscle and bone bruises. Bone bruises are the most serious. It can take months for a bruise to fade, but most last about two weeks. They start off a reddish color, and then turn bluish-purple and greenish-yellow before returning to normal. To reduce bruising, ice the injured area and elevate it above your heart. See your health care provider if you seem to bruise for no reason, or if the bruise appears to be infected.



Bleeding into the skin can occur from broken blood vessels that form tiny red dots (called petechiae). Blood also can collect under the tissue in larger flat areas (called purpura ), or in a very large bruised area (called an ecchymosis).Aside from the common bruise, bleeding into the skin or mucous membranes is a very significant sign and should always be checked out by a health care provider. Redness of the skin (erythema) should not be mistaken for bleeding. Areas of bleeding under the skin do not become paler (blanch) when you press on the area, like the redness from erythema does.

A bruise is an area of skin discoloration. A bruise occurs when small blood vessels break and leak their contents into the soft tissue beneath the skin.There are three types of bruises: Subcutaneous -- beneath the skin Intramuscular -- within the belly of the underlying muscle Periosteal -- bone bruise Bruises can last from days to months. A bone bruise is the most severe and painful.



Bleeding is the loss of blood . It can be external, or outside the body, like when you get a cut or wound . It can also be internal, or inside the body, like when you have an injury to an internal organ.  Some bleeding, such as gastrointestinal bleeding , coughing up blood, or vaginal bleeding , can be a symptom of a disease. Normally, when you are injured and start bleeding, a blood clot forms to stop the bleeding quickly. Afterwards, the clot dissolves naturally. To be able to make a clot, your blood needs blood proteins called clotting factors and a type of blood cell called platelets . Some people have a problem with clotting, due to another medical condition or an inherited disease. There are two types of problems: Your blood may not form clots normally, known as a bleeding disorder . This happens when your body does not make enough platelets or clotting factors, or they don't work the way they should. Your blood may make too many clots, or the clots may not dissolve properly Sometimes bleeding can cause other problems. A bruise is bleeding under the skin. Some strokes are caused by bleeding in the brain. Severe bleeding may require first aid or a trip to the emergency room .

Normally, if you get hurt, your body forms a blood clot to stop the bleeding . For blood to clot, your body needs cells called platelets and proteins known as clotting factors. If 
you have a bleeding disorder, you either do not have enough platelets or clotting factors 
or they don't work the way they should. Bleeding disorders can be the result of other diseases, such as severe liver disease or a lack of vitamin K . They can also be inherited. Hemophilia is an inherited bleeding disorder. Bleeding disorders can also be a side effect of medicines such as blood thinners . Various blood tests can check for a bleeding disorder. You will also have a physical exam and history. Treatments depend on the cause. They may include medicines and transfusions of blood , platelets, or clotting factor.

Platelets, also known as thrombocytes, are blood cells. They form in your bone marrow, a sponge-like tissue in your bones. Platelets play a major role in blood clotting. Normally, when one of your blood vessels is injured, you start to bleed. Your platelets will clot (clump together) to plug the hole in the blood vessel and stop the bleeding. You can have different problems with your platelets: If your blood has a low number of platelets , it is called thrombocytopenia. This can put you at risk for mild to serious bleeding . The bleeding could be external or internal. There can be various causes. If the problem is mild, you may not need treatment. For more serious cases, you may need medicines or blood or platelet transfusions . If your blood has too many platelets , you may have a higher risk of blood clots . When the cause is unknown, this is called thrombocythemia. It is rare. You may not need treatment if there are no signs or symptoms. In other cases, people who have it may need treatment with medicines or procedures. If another disease or condition is causing the high platelet count, it is thrombocytosis. The treatment and outlook for thrombocytosis depends on what is causing it. Another possible problem is that your platelets do not work as they should . For example, in von Willebrand Disease, your platelets cannot stick together or cannot attach to blood vessel walls. This can cause excessive bleeding. There are different types of in von Willebrand Disease; treatment depends on which type you have. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute









When you come in direct contact with electricity, it can pass through your body and cause injuries. These electrical injuries can be external or internal. You may have one or both types. External injuries are skin burns . Internal injuries include damage to your organs, bones, muscles, and nerves. You could also have abnormal heart rhythms and sudden cardiac arrest (SCA). How bad your injuries are depends on how strong the electric current was, what type of current it was, how it moved through your body, and how long you were exposed. Other factors include how healthy you are, and how quickly you get treatment. Causes of electrical injuries include: Lightning strikes Faulty electrical appliances Work-related exposures Contact with household wiring or power lines Accidents in small children, when they bite or suck on electrical cords, or stick objects in outlets If you get an electrical injury, you should see a doctor. You may have internal damage and not realize it.



An arrhythmia is a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. When the heart beats faster than normal, it is called tachycardia. When the heart beats too slowly, it is called bradycardia. The most common type of arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation , which causes an irregular and fast heart beat. Many factors can affect your heart's rhythm, such as having had a heart attack , smoking, congenital heart defects , and stress. Some substances or medicines may also cause arrhythmias. Symptoms of arrhythmias include: Fast or slow heart beat Skipping beats Lightheadedness or dizziness Chest pain Shortness of breath Sweating Your doctor can run tests to find out if you have an arrhythmia. Treatment to restore a normal heart rhythm may include medicines, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or pacemaker , or sometimes surgery. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) is a condition in which the heart suddenly stops beating. When that happens, blood stops flowing to the brain and other vital organs. If it is not treated, SCA usually causes death within minutes. But quick treatment with a defibrillator may be lifesaving. How is sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) different from a heart attack? A heart attack is different from an SCA. A heart attack happens when blood flow to the heart is blocked. During a heart attack, the heart usually doesn't suddenly stop beating. With an SCA, the heart stops beating. Sometimes an SCA can happen after or during recovery from a heart attack. What causes sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? Your heart has an electrical system that controls the rate and rhythm of your heartbeat.  An SCA can happen when the heart's electrical system is not working right and causes irregular heartbeats. Irregular heartbeats are called arrhythmias . There are different types. They may cause the heart to beat too fast, too slow, or with an irregular rhythm. Some can cause the heart to stop pumping blood to the body; this is the type that causes SCA. Certain diseases and conditions can cause the electrical problems that lead to SCA. They include: Ventricular fibrillation , a type of arrhythmia where the ventricles (the heart's lower chambers) don't beat normally. Instead, they beat very fast and very irregularly. They can't pump blood to the body. This causes most SCAs. Coronary artery disease (CAD) , also called ischemic heart disease. CAD happens when the arteries of the heart cannot deliver enough oxygen-rich blood to the heart. It is often caused by the buildup of plaque , a waxy substance, inside the lining of larger coronary arteries. The plaque blocks some or all of the blood flow to the heart. Some types of physical stress can cause your heart's electrical system to fail, such as Intense physical activity in which your body releases the hormone adrenaline. This hormone can trigger SCA in people who have heart problems. Very low blood levels of potassium or magnesium. These minerals play an important role in your heart's electrical system. Major blood loss Severe lack of oxygen Certain inherited disorders which can cause arrhythmias or problems with the structure of your heart Structural changes in the heart , such as an enlarged heart due to high blood pressure or advanced heart disease. Heart infections can also cause changes to the structure of the heart. Who is at risk for sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? You are at higher risk for SCA if you: Have coronary artery disease (CAD). Most people with SCA have CAD. But CAD usually doesn't cause symptoms, so they may not know that they have it. Are older; your risk increases with age Are a man; it is more common in men than women Are Black or African American, especially if you have other conditions such as diabetes , high blood pressure, heart failure , or chronic kidney disease Have a personal history of heartbeats that aren't regular (arrhythmia) Have a personal or family history of SCA or inherited disorders that can cause arrhythmia Have a problem with drug or alcohol use Have had a heart attack Have heart failure What are the symptoms of sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? Usually, the first sign of SCA is loss of consciousness ( fainting ). This happens when the heart stops beating. Some people may have a racing heartbeat or feel dizzy or light-headed just before they faint. And sometimes people have chest pain , shortness of breath , nausea, or vomiting in the hour before they have an SCA. How is sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) diagnosed? SCA happens without warning and requires emergency treatment. Health care providers rarely diagnose SCA with medical tests as it's happening. Instead, it is usually diagnosed after it happens. Providers do this by ruling out other causes of a person's sudden collapse. If you are at high risk for SCA, your provider may refer you to a cardiologist, a doctor who specializes in heart diseases. The cardiologist may ask you to get various heart health tests to see how well you heart is working. He or she will work with you to decide whether you need treatment to prevent SCA. What are the treatments for sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? SCA is an emergency. A person having SCA needs to be treated with a defibrillator right away. A defibrillator is a device sends an electric shock to the heart. The electric shock can restore a normal rhythm to a heart that's stopped beating. To work well, it needs to be done within minutes of the SCA. Most police officers, emergency medical technicians, and other first responders are trained and equipped to use a defibrillator. Call 9-1-1 right away if someone has signs or symptoms of SCA. The sooner you call for help, the sooner lifesaving treatment can begin. What should I do if I think that someone has had an SCA? Many public places such as schools, businesses, and airports have automated external defibrillators (AEDs). AEDs are special defibrillators that untrained people can use if they think that someone has had SCA. AEDS are programmed to give an electric shock if they detect a dangerous arrhythmia. This prevents giving a shock to someone who may have fainted but isn't having SCA. If you see someone who you think has had SCA, you should give cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) until defibrillation can be done. People who are at risk for SCA may want to consider having an AED at home. Ask your cardiologist to help you decide whether having an AED in your home might help you. What are the treatments after surviving sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? If you survive SCA, you'll likely be admitted to a hospital for ongoing care and treatment. In the hospital, your medical team will closely watch your heart. They may give you medicines to try to reduce the risk of another SCA. They will also try to find out what caused your SCA. If you're diagnosed with coronary artery disease, you may have an angioplasty or coronary artery bypass surgery . These procedures help restore blood flow through narrowed or blocked coronary arteries. Often, people who have had SCA get a device called an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) . This small device is surgically placed under the skin in your chest or abdomen. An ICD uses electric pulses or shocks to help control dangerous arrhythmias. Can sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) be prevented? You may be able to lower your risk of SCA by following a heart-healthy lifestyle . If you have coronary artery disease or another heart disease, treating that disease can also lower your risk of SCA. If you have had an SCA, getting an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) can lower your chance of having another SCA. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute















A closed suction drain is placed under your skin during surgery. This drain removes any blood or other fluids that might build up in this area.A closed suction drain is used to remove fluids that build up in areas of your body after surgery or when you have an infection. Although there is more than one brand of closed suction drains, this drain is often called a Jackson-Pratt, or JP, drain. The drain is made up of two parts: A thin rubber tube A soft, round squeeze bulb that looks like a grenade One end of the rubber tube is placed in the area of your body where fluid may build up. The other end comes out through a small incision (cut). A squeeze bulb is attached to this outer end. Ask your health care provider when you may take a shower while you have this drain. You may be asked to take a sponge bath until the drain is removed. There are many ways to wear the drain depending on where the drain comes out of your body. The squeeze bulb has a plastic loop that can be used to pin the bulb to your clothes. If the drain is in your upper body, you can tie a cloth tape around your neck like a necklace and hang the bulb from the tape. There are special garments, such as camisoles, belts, or shorts that have pockets or Velcro loops for the bulbs and openings for the tubes. Ask your provider what might be best for you. Health insurance may cover the cost of these garments, if you get a prescription from your provider.

After any operation , you'll have some side effects. There is usually some pain with surgery. There may also be swelling and soreness around the area that the surgeon cut.   Your surgeon can tell you which side effects to expect. There can also be complications. These are unplanned events linked to the operation. Some complications are infection, too much bleeding, reaction to anesthesia , or accidental injury. Some people have a greater risk of complications because of other medical conditions. Your surgeon can tell you how you might feel and what you will be able to do - or not do - the first few days, weeks, or months after surgery. Some other questions to ask are: How long you will be in the hospital What kind of supplies, equipment, and help you might need when you go home When you can go back to work When it is ok to start exercising again Are they any other restrictions in your activities Following your surgeon's advice can help you recover as soon as possible. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality



A crush injury occurs when force or pressure is put on a body part. This type of injury most often happens when part of the body is squeezed between two heavy objects. Damage related to crush injuries include: Bleeding Bruising Compartment syndrome (increased pressure in an arm or leg that causes serious muscle, nerve, blood vessel, and tissue damage) Fracture (broken bone) Laceration (open wound) Nerve injury Infection (caused by bacteria that enter the body through the wound)Steps for first aid treatment of a crush injury are: Stop bleeding by applying direct pressure. Cover the area with a wet cloth or bandage. Then, raise the area above the level of the heart, if possible. If there is suspicion of a head, neck, or spinal injury, immobilize those areas if possible and then limit movement to only the crushed area. Call your local emergency number (such as 911) or local hospital for further advice. Crush injuries most often need to be evaluated in a hospital emergency department. Surgery may be needed.



A cut is a break or opening in the skin. It is also called a laceration. A cut may be deep, smooth, or jagged. It may be near the surface of the skin, or deeper. A deep cut can affect tendons, muscles, ligaments, nerves, blood vessels, or bone. A puncture is a wound made by a pointed object such as a nail, knife, or sharp tooth. Puncture wounds often appear to be on the surface, but may extend into the deeper tissue layers.Symptoms include: Bleeding Problems with function (movement) or feeling (numbness, tingling) below the wound site Pain Infection may occur with some cuts and puncture wounds. The following are more likely to become infected: Bites Punctures Crush injuries Dirty wounds Wounds on the feet Wounds that are not promptly treated



An electrical injury is damage to the skin or internal organs when a person comes into direct contact with an electrical current.The human body conducts electricity very well. That means electricity passes very easily throughout the body. Direct contact with electrical current can be deadly. While some electrical burns look minor, there still may be serious internal damage, especially to the heart, muscles, or brain. Electric current can cause injury in four ways: Cardiac arrest due to the electrical effect on the heart Muscle, nerve, and tissue destruction from a current passing through the body Thermal burns from contact with the electrical source Falling or injury after contact with electricity

Burns commonly occur by direct or indirect contact with heat, electric current, radiation, or chemical agents. Burns can lead to cell death, which can require hospitalization and can be fatal.There are three levels of burns: First-degree burns affect only the outer layer of the skin. They cause pain, redness, and swelling. Second-degree burns affect both the outer and underlying layer of skin. They cause pain, redness, swelling, and blistering. They are also called partial thickness burns. Third-degree burns affect the deep layers of skin. They are also called full thickness burns. They cause white or blackened, burned skin. The skin may be numb. Burns fall into two groups. Minor burns are: First degree burns anywhere on the body Second degree burns less than 2 to 3 inches (5 to 7.5 centimeters) wide Major burns include: Third-degree burns Second-degree burns more than 2 to 3 inches (5 to 7.5 centimeters) wide Second-degree burns on the hands, feet, face, groin, buttocks, or over a major joint You can have more than one type of burn at a time. Major burns need urgent medical care. This can help prevent scarring, disability, and deformity. Burns on the face, hands, feet, and genitals can be particularly serious. Children under age 4 and adults over age 60 have a higher chance of complications and death from severe burns because their skin tends to be thinner than in other age groups.

A genital injury is an injury to male or female sex organs, mainly those outside the body. It also refers to injury in the area between the legs, called the perineum.Injury to the genitals can be very painful. It may cause a lot of bleeding. Such injury can affect the reproductive organs and the bladder and urethra. Damage may be temporary or permanent.

A gunshot wound is caused when a bullet or other projectile is shot into or through the body. Gunshot wounds can cause serious injury, including: Severe bleeding Damage to tissues and organs Broken bones Wound infections Paralysis The amount of damage depends on the location of the injury and the speed and type of bullet. Gunshot wounds to the head or body (torso) are likely to cause more damage. High-velocity wounds with fracture are associated with an increased risk of infection.If the wound was severe, you may have had surgery to: Stop bleeding Clean the wound Find and remove bullet pieces Find and remove pieces of broken or shattered bone Place drains or tubes for body fluids Remove portions of, or whole, organs Gunshot wounds that pass through the body without hitting major organs, blood vessels, or bone tend to cause less damage. You may have bullet pieces that remain in your body. Often these cannot be removed without causing more damage. Scar tissue will form around these remaining pieces, which may cause ongoing pain or other discomfort. You may have an open wound or a closed wound , depending on your injury. Your health care provider will tell you how to change your dressing and care for your wound. Keep these tips in mind: Keep the dressing and area around it clean and dry. Take any antibiotics or pain relievers as directed. Gunshot wounds can get infected because material and debris can get pulled into the wound with the bullet. Try to elevate the wound so it is above your heart. This helps reduce swelling. You may need to do this while sitting or lying down. You can use pillows to prop up the area. If your provider says it is OK, you may use an ice pack on the bandage to help with swelling. Ask how often you should apply the ice. Be sure to keep the bandage dry. Your provider may change your dressing for you at first. Once you get the OK to change the dressing yourself: Follow instructions on how to clean and dry the wound. Be sure to wash your hands after removing an old dressing and before cleaning the wound. Wash your hands again after cleaning the wound and applying the new dressing. Do not use skin cleansers, alcohol, peroxide, iodine, or soaps with antibacterial chemicals on the wound unless your provider tells you to. These can damage the wound tissue and slow your healing. Do not put any lotion, cream, or herbal remedies on or around your wound without asking your provider first. If you have non-dissolvable stitches or staples, your provider will remove them within 3 to 21 days. Do not pull at your stitches or try to remove them on your own.



A Hemovac drain is placed under your skin during surgery. This drain removes any blood or other fluids that might build up in this area. You can go home with the drain still in place.Your nurse will tell you how often you need to empty the drain. You will also be shown how to empty and take care of your drain. The following instructions will help you at home. If you have questions, ask your health care provider.





A wound is a break or opening in the skin. Your skin protects your body from germs. When the skin is broken, even during surgery, germs can enter and cause infection. Wounds often occur because of an accident or injury. Types of wounds include: Cuts Scrapes Puncture wounds Burns Pressure sores A wound may be smooth or jagged. It may be near the surface of the skin or deeper. Deep wounds can affect: Tendons Muscles Ligaments Nerves Blood vessels Bones Minor wounds often heal easily, but all wounds need care to prevent infection.Wounds heal in stages. The smaller the wound, the quicker it will heal. The larger or deeper the wound, the longer it takes to heal. When you get a cut, scrape, or puncture, the wound will bleed. The blood will start to clot within a few minutes or less and stop the bleeding. The blood clots dry and form a scab, which protects the tissue underneath from germs. Not all wounds bleed. For example, burns, some puncture wounds, and pressure sores do not bleed. Once the scab forms, your body's immune system starts to protect the wound from infection. The wound becomes slightly swollen, red or pink, and tender. You also may see some clear fluid oozing from the wound. This fluid helps clean the area. Blood vessels open in the area, so blood can bring oxygen and nutrients to the wound. Oxygen is essential for healing. White blood cells help fight infection from germs and begin to repair the wound. This stage takes about 2 to 5 days. Tissue growth and rebuilding occur next. Over the next 3 weeks or so, the body repairs broken blood vessels and new tissue grows. Red blood cells help create collagen, which are tough, white fibers that form the foundation for new tissue. The wound starts to fill in with new tissue, called granulation tissue. New skin begins to form over this tissue. As the wound heals, the edges pull inward and the wound gets smaller. A scar forms and the wound becomes stronger. As healing continues, you may notice that the area itches. After the scab falls off, the area may look stretched, red, and shiny. The scar that forms will be smaller than the original wound. It will be less strong and less flexible than the surrounding skin. Over time, the scar will fade and may disappear completely. This can take as long as 2 years. Some scars never go away completely. Scars form because the new tissue grows back differently than the original tissue. If you only injured the top layer of skin, you will probably not have a scar. With deeper wounds, you are more likely to have a scar. Some people are more likely to scar than others. Some may have thick, unsightly scars called keloids . People with darker complexions are more likely to have keloids form.



A human bite can break, puncture, or tear the skin. Bites that break the skin can be very serious because of the risk for infection.Human bites can occur in two ways: If someone bites you If your hand comes into contact with a person's teeth and breaks the skin, such as during a fist fight Bites are very common among young children. Children often bite to express anger or other negative feelings. Males between 10 and 34 years old are more likely to be victims of human bites. Human bites may be more dangerous than animal bites. Certain germs in some human mouths can cause hard-to-treat infections. You can also get certain diseases from a human bite, such as HIV/AIDS or hepatitis B or hepatitis C .



Hyperbaric oxygen therapy uses a special pressure chamber to increase the amount of oxygen in the blood.Some hospitals have a hyperbaric chamber. Smaller units may be available in outpatient centers. The air pressure inside a hyperbaric oxygen chamber is about two and a half times higher than the normal pressure in the atmosphere. This helps your blood carry more oxygen to organs and tissues in your body. The other benefits of increased pressure of oxygen in the tissues may include: More and improved oxygen supply Reduction in swelling and edema Stopping infection Hyperbaric therapy can help wounds, particularly infected wounds, heal more quickly. The therapy may be used to treat: Air or gas embolism Bone infections ( osteomyelitis ) that have not improved with other treatments Burns Crush injuries Frost bites Carbon monoxide poisoning Certain types of brain or sinus infections Decompression sickness (for example, a diving injury) Gas gangrene Necrotizing soft tissue infections Radiation injury (for example, damage from radiation therapy for cancer) Skin grafts Wounds that have not healed with other treatments (for example, it may be used to treat a foot ulcer in someone with diabetes or very bad circulation) This treatment may also be used to provide enough oxygen to the lung during a procedure called whole lung lavage, which is used to clean an entire lung in people with certain medical conditions, like pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Treatment for long-term (chronic) conditions may be repeated over days or weeks. A treatment session for more acute conditions such as decompression sickness may last longer, but may not need to be repeated. You might feel pressure in your ears while you are in the hyperbaric chamber. Your ears may pop when you get out of the chamber.

Blood clots are clumps that occur when blood hardens from a liquid to a solid. A blood clot that forms inside one of your veins or arteries is called a thrombus. A thrombus may also form in your heart. A thrombus that breaks loose and travels from one location in the body to another is called an embolus . A thrombus or embolus can partly or completely block the flow of blood in a blood vessel. A blockage in an artery may prevent oxygen from reaching the tissues in that area. This is called ischemia. If ischemia is not treated promptly, it can lead to tissue damage or death. A blockage in the vein will often cause fluid buildup and swelling.Situations in which a blood clot is more likely to form in veins include: Being on long-term bed rest Sitting for long periods, such as in a plane or car During and after pregnancy Taking birth control pills or estrogen hormones (especially in women who smoke) Long-term use of an intravenous catheter After surgery Blood clots are also more likely to form after an injury. People with cancer, obesity, and liver or kidney disease are also prone to blood clots. Smoking also increases the risk of forming blood clots. Conditions that are passed down through families (inherited) may make you more likely to form abnormal blood clots. Inherited conditions that affect clotting are: Factor V Leiden mutation Prothrombin G20210A mutation Other rare conditions, such as protein C, protein S , and antithrombin III deficiencies . A blood clot may block an artery or vein in the heart, affecting the: Heart (angina or a heart attack) Intestines ( mesenteric ischemia or mesenteric venous thrombosis ) Kidneys ( renal vein thrombosis ) Leg or arm arteries Legs ( deep vein thrombosis ) Lungs ( pulmonary embolism ) Neck or brain (stroke)

A laceration is a cut that goes all the way through the skin. A small cut can be cared for at home. A large cut needs medical attention right away. If the cut is large, it may need stitches or staples to close the wound and stop the bleeding. It is important to take care of the injury site after the doctor or health care provider applies the stitches. This helps prevent infection and allows the wound to heal properly.Stitches are special threads that are sewn through the skin at an injury site to bring a wound together. Care for your stitches and wound as follows: Keep the area clean and dry for the first 24 to 48 hours after stitches have been placed. Then, you can start to gently wash around the site 1 to 2 times daily. Wash with cool water and soap. Clean as close to the stitches as you can. Do not wash or rub the stitches directly. Dab the site dry with a clean paper towel. Do not rub the area. Avoid using the towel directly on the stitches. If there was a bandage over the stitches, replace it with a new clean bandage and antibiotic treatment, if instructed to do so. Your provider should also tell you when you need to have a wound checked and the stitches removed. If not, contact your provider for an appointment.





A skin graft is a piece of healthy skin removed from one area of your body to repair damaged or missing skin somewhere else on your body. This skin does not have its own source of blood flow. Learning how to care for skin flaps and grafts can help them heal more quickly and reduce scarring.A skin flap is healthy skin and tissue that is partly detached and moved to cover a nearby wound. A skin flap may contain skin and fat, or skin, fat, and muscle. Often, a skin flap is still attached to its original site at one end and remains connected to a blood vessel. Sometimes a flap is moved to a new site and the blood vessel is surgically reconnected. This is called a free flap. Skin grafts are used to help more serious, larger and deeper wounds heal, including: Wounds that are too big to heal on their own Burns Skin loss from a serious skin infection Surgery for skin cancer Venous ulcers , pressure ulcers , or diabetic ulcers that do not heal After mastectomy or amputation The area from where skin is taken is called the donor site. After surgery, you will have two wounds, the graft or flap itself and the donor site. Donor sites for grafts and flaps are chosen based on: How closely the skin matches the area of the wound How visible the scar will be from the donor site How close the donor site is to the wound Often the donor site may be more painful after surgery than the wound due to newly exposed nerve endings.

Your skin is your body's largest organ. It covers and protects your body. Your skin: Holds body fluids in, preventing dehydration Keeps harmful microbes out, preventing infections Helps you feel things like heat, cold, and pain Keeps your body temperature even Makes vitamin D when the sun shines on it Anything that irritates, clogs, or inflames your skin can cause symptoms such as redness, swelling, burning, and itching . Allergies, irritants, your genetic makeup, and certain diseases and immune system problems can cause rashes , hives , and other skin conditions. Many skin problems, such as acne , also affect your appearance. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases



Sterile means free from germs. When you care for your catheter or surgery wound, you need to take steps to avoid spreading germs. Some cleaning and care procedures need to be done in a sterile way so that you do not get an infection. Follow your health care provider's instructions on using sterile technique. Use the information below as a reminder of the steps.Carefully follow all of the steps below to keep your work area sterile. You will need: Running water and soap A sterile kit or pad Gloves (sometimes these are in your kit) A clean, dry surface Clean paper towels Wash your hands well and keep all work surfaces clean and dry at all times. When you handle supplies, touch only the outside wrappers with your bare hands. You may need to wear a mask over your nose and mouth. Keep your supplies within your reach so you do not drop or rub against them while you go through the steps. If you need to cough or sneeze, turn your head away from your supplies and cover your mouth firmly with the crook of your elbow.



When you have open heart surgery , the surgeon makes a cut (incision) that runs down the middle of your chest bone (sternum). The incision usually heals on its own. But sometimes, there are complications that require treatment. Two wound complications that can happen within 30 days of open heart surgery are: Infection in the wound or chest bone. The symptoms can be pus at the incision, a fever, or feeling tired and sick. The sternum separates into two. The sternum and chest become unstable. You might hear a clicking sound in the sternum when breathing, coughing, or moving around.To treat the complication, the surgeon reopens the area that was operated on. The procedure is done in the operating room. The surgeon: Removes the wires holding the sternum together. Does tests of the skin and tissue in the wound to look for signs of infection. Removes dead or infected tissue in the wound (debride the wound). Rinses the wound with salt water (saline). After the wound is cleaned out, the surgeon may or may not close the wound. The wound is packed with a dressing. The dressing will be changed often. Or your surgeon may use a VAC (vacuum-assisted closure) dressing. It is a negative pressure dressing. It increases blood flow around the sternum and improves healing. The parts of VAC dressing are: Vacuum pump Foam piece cut to fit the wound Vacuum tube Clear dressing that is taped on top The foam piece is changed every 2 to 3 days. Your surgeon may put a chest harness on you. This will make the chest bones more stable. It may take days, weeks, or even months for the wound to be clean, clear of infection, and finally heal. Once this occurs, the surgeon may use a muscle flap to cover and close the wound. The flap can be taken from your buttocks, shoulder, or upper chest.

Heart surgery is any surgery done on the heart muscle, valves, arteries, or the aorta and other large arteries connected to the heart. The term "open heart surgery" means that you are connected to a heart-lung bypass machine, or bypass pump during surgery. Your heart is stopped while you are connected to this machine. This machine does the work of your heart and lungs while your heart is stopped for the surgery. The machine adds oxygen to your blood, moves blood through your body, and removes carbon dioxide. Common types of open-heart surgery include: Heart bypass surgery (coronary artery bypass graft -- CABG) Heart valve surgery Surgery to correct heart a defect present at birth New procedures are being done on the heart through smaller cuts. Some new procedures are being done while the heart is still beating.Heart surgery - open

An incision is a cut through the skin that is made during surgery. It is also called a surgical wound. Some incisions are small, others are long. The size of the incision depends on the kind of surgery you had. Sometimes, an incision breaks open. This may happen along the entire cut or just part of it. Your doctor may decide not to close it again with sutures (stitches).If your doctor does not close your wound again with sutures, you need to care for it at home, since it may take time to heal. The wound will heal from the bottom to the top. A dressing helps absorb drainage and keep the skin from closing before the wound underneath fills in.





An incision is a cut through the skin made during surgery. It is also called a "surgical wound." Some incisions are small. Others are very long. The size of an incision depends on the kind of surgery you had. To close your incision, your doctor used one of the following: Stitches (sutures) Clips Staples Skin glue Proper wound care can help prevent infection and reduce scarring as your surgical wound heals.When you come home after surgery, you may have a dressing on your wound. Dressings do several things, including: Protect your wound from germs Reduce the risk of infection Cover your wound so that stitches or staples do not catch on clothing Protect the area as it heals Soak up any fluids that leak from your wound You can leave your original dressing in place for as long as your health care provider says. You will want to change it sooner if it becomes wet or soaked with blood or other fluids. Do not wear tight clothing that rubs against the incision while it is healing. Your provider will tell you how often to change your dressing. Your provider likely gave you specific instructions on how to change the dressing. The steps outlined below will help you remember. Getting prepared: Clean your hands before touching the dressing. Wash your hands with soap and warm water. Also clean under your nails. Rinse, then dry your hands with a clean towel. Make sure you have all the supplies handy. Have a clean work surface. Remove the old dressing. Put on clean medical gloves if your wound is infected (red or oozing), or if you are changing the dressing for someone else. The gloves do not need to be sterile. Carefully loosen the tape from the skin. If the dressing sticks to the wound, moisten it gently with water and try again, unless your doctor instructed you to pull it off dry. Put the old dressing in a plastic bag and set it aside. Remove the gloves if you had them on. Throw them in the same plastic bag as the old dressing. Wash your hands again. When you put on a new dressing: Make sure your hands are clean. Put on clean gloves if your own wound is infected, or if you are putting on dressing for someone else. Do not touch the inside of the dressing. Do not apply antibiotic cream unless your doctor tells you to. Place the dressing over the wound and tape down all 4 sides. Put the old dressing, tape, and other trash in the plastic bag. Seal the bag and throw it away. If you have non-dissolvable stitches or staples, the provider will remove them. Do not pull at your stitches or try to remove them on your own.





Surgery that involves a cut (incision) in the skin can lead to a wound infection after surgery. Most surgical wound infections show up within the first 30 days after surgery. Surgical wound infections may have pus draining from them and can be red, painful or hot to touch. You might have a fever and feel sick.Surgical wounds can become infected by: Germs that are already on your skin that spread to the surgical wound Germs that are inside your body or from the organ on which the surgery was performed Germs that are in the environment around you such as infected surgical instruments or on the hands of the health care provider. You are more at risk for a surgical wound infection if you: Have poorly controlled diabetes Have problems with your immune system Are overweight or obese Are a smoker Take corticosteroids (for example, prednisone) Have surgery that lasts longer than 2 hours There are different levels of wound infections: Superficial -- the infection is in the skin area only Deep -- the infection goes deeper than the skin into the muscle and tissue Organ/space -- the infection is deep and involves the organ and space where you had surgery

Your health care provider has covered your wound with a wet-to-dry dressing. With this type of dressing, a wet (or moist) gauze dressing is put on your wound and allowed to dry. Wound drainage and dead tissue can be removed when you take off the old dressing. Follow any instructions you are given on how to change the dressing. Use this sheet as a reminder.Your provider will tell you how often you should change your dressing at home. As the wound heals, you should not need as much gauze or packing gauze.



A wound care center, or clinic, is a medical facility for treating wounds that do not heal. You may have a non-healing wound if it: Has not started to heal in 2 weeks Has not completely healed in 6 weeksCommon types of non-healing wounds include: Pressure sores Surgical wounds Radiation sores Foot ulcers due to diabetes , poor blood flow, chronic bone infection (osteomyelitis), or swollen legs Certain wounds may not heal well due to: Diabetes Poor circulation Nerve damage Bone infection Being inactive or immobile Weak immune system Poor nutrition Excess alcohol use Smoking Non-healing wounds may take months to heal. Some wounds never heal completely.

Health facilities are places that provide health care. They include hospitals, clinics, outpatient care centers, and specialized care centers, such as birthing centers and psychiatric care centers. When you choose a health facility, you might want to consider: How close it is to where you live or work Whether your health insurance will pay for services there Whether your health care provider can treat you there The quality of the facility Quality is important.  Some facilities do a better job than others. One way to learn about the quality of a facility is to look at report cards developed by federal, state, and consumer groups.





As parents, we want to keep our children safe from harm. Take steps to keep your children safe: Install the right child safety seat in your car Teach children how to cross the street safely Make sure they wear the right gear and equipment for sports Install and test smoke alarms Store medicines, cleaners and other dangerous substances in locked cabinets Babyproof your home Don't leave small children unattended

Every year thousands of people in the U.S. die from motor vehicle crashes. Trying to prevent these crashes is one part of motor vehicle safety.  Here are some things you can do to be safer on the road: Make sure your vehicle is safe and in working order Use car seats for children Wear your seat belt Don't speed or drive aggressively Don't drive impaired Safety also involves being aware of others. Share the road with bicycles and motorcycles, and watch for pedestrians.

Playing sports can be fun, but it can also be dangerous if you are not careful. You can help prevent injuries by: Getting a physical to make sure you are healthy before you start playing your sport Wearing the right shoes, gear, and equipment Drinking lots of water Warming up and stretching If you have already hurt yourself playing a sport, make sure you recover completely before you start up again.  If possible, protect the injured part of your body with padding, a brace, or special equipment. When you do start playing again, start slowly.

A poison is any substance that is harmful to your body. You might swallow it, inhale it, inject it, or absorb it through your skin. Any substance can be poisonous if too much is taken. Poisons can include: Prescription or over-the-counter medicines taken in doses that are too high Overdoses of illegal drugs Carbon monoxide from gas appliances Household products , such as laundry powder or furniture polish Pesticides Indoor or outdoor plants Metals such as lead and mercury The effects of poisoning range from short-term illness to brain damage, coma, and death. To prevent poisoning it is important to use and store products exactly as their labels say. Keep dangerous products where children can't get to them. Treatment for poisoning depends on the type of poison. If you suspect someone has been poisoned, call your local poison control center at 1-800-222-1222 right away.



To prevent accidents in the bathroom, never leave your child alone in the bathroom. When the bathroom is not being used, keep the door closed.Children younger than 6 years old should NOT be left unattended in the bathtub. They should also not be in the bathroom alone if there is water in the bathtub. Empty the tub after baths. Make sure the tub is empty before you leave the bathroom. Older siblings bathing with younger ones should NOT be put in charge of a younger child's safety. There should be an adult in the bathroom during bath time.

Child safety seats are proven to save children's lives in accidents. In the United States, all states require children to be secured in a car seat or booster seat until they reach certain height or weight requirements. These vary by state. Most children grow big enough to move to a regular seat belt between 8 and 12 years old. To keep your child safe, keep these tips in mind when using a car safety seat. When your child is born, you must have a car seat to bring the baby home from the hospital. Always secure your child in a car seat whenever riding in a vehicle. Make sure the harness is fastened snugly. Read the car seat manufacturer's instructions for the proper way to use the seat. Read your vehicle owner's manual, too. Car seats and booster seats should always be used on the back seat of a vehicle. If there is no back seat, the car seat can be secured on the front passenger seat. This can ONLY be done when there is no front or side air bag, or the air bag has been switched off. Even after children are big enough to wear a seat belt, riding in the back seat is safest. When you are selecting a child safety seat for the first time: The seat must fit your child's size and be able to be properly installed in your vehicle. It is best to use a new car seat. Used car seats often do not have instructions. They may have cracks or other problems that make the seat unsafe. For example, the seat may have been damaged during a car accident. Try the seat before buying it. Install the seat in your vehicle. Put your child in the car seat. Secure the harness and buckle. Check that the seat fits your vehicle and child. DO NOT use a car seat past its expiration date. The seat frame may no longer be strong enough to support your child safely. The expiration date is usually on the bottom of the seat. DO NOT use a seat that has been recalled. Fill out and send in the registration card that comes with the new car seat. The manufacturer can contact you if the seat is recalled. You can find out about recalls by contacting the manufacturer, or by looking up safety complaints records on your child's safety seat at www.nhtsa.gov/recalls#car-seats . The types of child safety seats and restraints include: Rear-facing seats Forward-facing seats Booster seats Car beds Built-in car seats Travel vests REAR-FACING SEATS A rear-facing seat is one in which your child faces the back of the vehicle. The seat should be installed in the back seat of your vehicle. The two types of rear-facing seats are the infant-only seat and the convertible seat. Infant-only rear-facing seats . These seats are for babies who weigh up to 22 to 30 pounds (10 to 13.5 kilograms), depending on the car seat. You will need a new seat when your child gets bigger. Many children grow out of these seats by age 8 to 9 months. Infant-only seats have handles so you can carry the seat to and from the car. Some have a base you can leave installed in the car. This lets you click the car seat into place each time you use it. Follow the manufacturer's instructions on how the seat should be reclined so your baby's head does not shift around while you are driving. Convertible seats . These seats are to be placed in the rear-facing position and are for infants and toddlers. When your child is older and bigger, the seat can be switched to the forward-facing position. Experts recommend keeping your child rear-facing until at least age 3 and until your child outgrows the weight or height allowed by the seat. FORWARD-FACING SEATS A forward-facing seat should be installed on the back seat of your vehicle, although it allows your child to face the front of the car. These seats are used only after your child is too big for a rear-facing seat. A combination forward-facing booster seat may also be used. For younger children, the booster seat's harness straps should be used. After your child reaches the upper height and weight limit for the harness (based on the seat's instructions), the vehicle's own lap and shoulder belts can be used to keep your child strapped in. BOOSTER SEATS A booster seat raises your child up so the vehicle's own lap and shoulder belts fit correctly. The lap belt should fall across your child's upper thighs. The shoulder belt should go across the middle of your child's shoulder and chest. Use booster seats for older children until they are big enough to fit into a seat belt properly. The lap belt should fit low and tight across the upper thighs, and the shoulder belt should fit snug across the shoulder and chest and not cross the neck or face. A child's legs must be long enough so the feet can be flat on the floor. Most children can wear a seatbelt sometime between ages 8 and 12 years. CAR BEDS These seats are also called flat car seats. They are used for premature or other special-needs babies. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends having a health care provider look at how your preterm baby fits and breathes in a car seat before leaving the hospital. BUILT-IN SEATS Some vehicles have built-in car seats. Weight and height limits vary. You can get more details on these seats by reading the vehicle owner's manual or calling the vehicle manufacturer. TRAVEL VESTS Special vests can be worn by older children who have outgrown forward-facing safety seats. The vests can be used instead of booster seats. The vests are used with the vehicle's lap and seat belts. As with car seats, children should be sitting in the back seat when using the vest.Child car seats; Infant car seats; Car seats; Car safety seats

The following article offers recommendations for choosing a crib that meets current safety standards and implementing safe sleep practices for infants.Whether new or old, your crib should meet all current government safety standards: Cribs should not have drop-rails. They are not safe for babies. Crib parts and hardware must be stronger than in the past. If you have an older crib that was made before the new safety standards were put into place: Check with the maker of the crib. They may offer hardware to keep the drop side from moving. Check the crib often to make sure the hardware is tight and no parts are broken or missing. Check to see if your crib has been recalled before you use it. Think about buying a new crib that meets the current standards, if you can.

Although no child is injury proof, parents can take simple steps to keep their children from getting head injuries.Your child should wear a seatbelt at all times when they are in a car or other motor vehicle. Use a child safety seat or booster seat that is best for their age, weight, and height. A seat that fits poorly can be dangerous. You can have your car seat checked at an inspection station. You can find a station near you by checking the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) website -- www.nhtsa.gov/equipment/car-seats-and-booster-seats#35091 . Children can switch from car seats to booster seats when they weigh 40 pounds (lb), or 18 kilograms (kg). There are car seats that are made for children who weigh more than 40 lbs or 18 kg. Car and booster seat laws vary by state. It is a good idea to keep your child in a booster seat until they are at least 4'9" (145 cm) tall and between 8 and 12 years old. Do not drive with a child in your car when you have been drinking alcohol, used illegal drugs, or are feeling very tired.

Going home with a new baby is exciting, but it can be scary, too. Newborns have many needs, like frequent feedings and diaper changes. Babies can have health issues that are different from older children and adults, like diaper rash and cradle cap. Your baby will go through many changes during the first year of life. You may feel uneasy at first. Ask your health care provider for help if you need it.



Your child spends more time at school than anywhere else except home. Schools can have a major effect on children's health. Schools can teach children about health, and promote healthy behaviors. Physical education classes give children a chance to get exercise. Schools work to: Prevent risky behaviors such as alcohol and tobacco use or bullying and cyberbullying Encourage healthy habits like exercise and healthy eating Deal with specific health problems in students, such as asthma , obesity and infectious diseases The school building and environment should be a safe and healthy place for your child.















You can't remove all the safety hazards from your life, but you can reduce them. To avoid many major hazards and prepare for emergencies: Keep emergency phone numbers by your telephones Make a first aid kit for your home Make a family emergency plan Install and maintain smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors Keep guns unloaded and locked up. Lock up the ammunition separately. Follow the directions carefully when using tools or equipment Young children are especially at risk.  Supervision is the best way to keep them safe. Childproofing the house can also help.

Preventing fires is an important part of fire safety. In the United States, cooking is the main cause of home fires. Cigarettes are a big risk too - they are the leading cause of fire deaths. Here are some fire prevention tips: Don't leave the stove or oven unattended when they are on Don't let children use kitchen appliances unsupervised Don't smoke in bed Make sure your electrical appliances and cords are in good condition It is also important to be prepared in case there is a fire. Make sure that you have working smoke detectors on every floor and in every bedroom. You should also have fire extinguishers on every floor and in your kitchen.  Make and practice an escape plan in case the main exit is blocked.

Carbon monoxide (CO) is a gas that has no odor or color. But it is very dangerous. It can cause sudden illness and death. CO is found in combustion fumes, such as those made by cars and trucks, lanterns, stoves, gas ranges and heating systems. CO from these fumes can build up in places that don't have a good flow of fresh air.  You can be poisoned by breathing them in.  The most common symptoms of CO poisoning are: Headache Dizziness Weakness Nausea Vomiting Chest pain Confusion It is often hard to tell if someone has CO poisoning, because the symptoms may be like those of other illnesses. People who are sleeping or intoxicated can die from CO poisoning before they have symptoms. A CO detector can warn you if you have high levels of CO in your home. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention











A scar is a permanent patch of skin that grows over a wound . It forms when your body heals itself after a cut, scrape, burn, or sore. You can also get scars from surgery that cuts through the skin, infections like chickenpox, or skin conditions like acne . Scars are often thicker, as well as pinker, redder, or shinier, than the rest of your skin. How your scar looks depends on: How big and deep your wound is Where it is How long it takes to heal Your age Your inherited tendency to scar Scars usually fade over time but never go away completely. If the way a scar looks bothers you, various treatments might minimize it. These include surgical revision, dermabrasion, laser treatments, injections, chemical peels, and creams.



Acne is a common skin disease that causes pimples. Pimples form when hair follicles 
under your skin clog up. Most pimples form on the face, neck, back, chest, and shoulders. Anyone can get acne, but 
it is common in teenagers and young adults. It is not serious, but it can cause scars . No one knows exactly what causes acne. Hormone changes, such as those during the teenage 
years and pregnancy, probably play a role. There are many myths about what causes acne. Chocolate and greasy foods are often 
blamed, but there is little evidence that foods have much effect on acne in most people. 
Another common myth is that dirty skin causes acne; however, blackheads and pimples are not 
caused by dirt. Stress doesn't cause acne, but stress can make it worse. If you have acne: Clean your skin gently Try not to touch your skin Avoid the sun Treatments for acne include medicines and creams. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin 
Diseases



Dermabrasion is the removal of the top layers of the skin. It is a type of skin-smoothing surgery.Dermabrasion is usually done by a doctor, either a plastic surgeon or dermatologic surgeon. The procedure takes place in your doctor's office or an outpatient clinic. You'll likely be awake. A numbing medicine (local anesthesia) will be applied to the skin that will be treated. If you are having a complex procedure, you may be given medicines called sedatives to make you sleepy and less anxious. Another option is general anesthesia , which allows you to sleep through surgery and not feel any pain during the procedure. Dermabrasion uses a special device to gently and carefully "sand down" the top surface of the skin down to normal, healthy skin. Petroleum jelly or antibiotic ointment is placed on the treated skin to prevent scabs and scars from forming.

A keloid is a growth of extra scar tissue. It occurs where the skin has healed after an injury.Keloids can form after skin injuries from: Acne Burns Chickenpox Ear or body piercing Minor scratches Cuts from surgery or trauma Vaccination sites Keloids are most common in people younger than 30. Black people, Asians, and Hispanics are more prone to developing keloids. Keloids often run in families. Sometimes, a person may not recall what injury caused a keloid to form.

Scar revision is surgery to improve or reduce the appearance of scars. It also restores function, and corrects skin changes (disfigurement) caused by an injury, wound, poor healing, or previous surgery.Scar tissue forms as skin heals after an injury (such as an accident) or surgery. How much scarring there is depends on: Size, depth, and location of the wound Your age Skin characteristics, such as color (pigmentation) Depending on the extent of the surgery, scar revision can be done while you are awake (local anesthesia), sleeping (sedated), or deep asleep and pain-free (general anesthesia). When to have scar revision done is not always clear. Scars shrink and become less noticeable as they age. You may be able to wait to have surgery until the scar lightens in color. This can be several months or even a year after the wound has healed. For some scars, it is best to have revision surgery 60 to 90 days after the scar matures or longer. Each scar is different. There are several ways to improve the appearance of scars: The scar may be removed completely and the new wound closed very carefully. Scar massage and pressure therapy, such as silicone strips. Dermabrasion involves removing the upper layers of the skin with a special wire brush called a burr or fraise. New skin grows over this area. Dermabrasion can be used to soften the surface of the skin or reduce irregularities. A laser may be used to soften the surface of the scar, and stimulate new collagen growth within the scar. Very large injuries (such as burns) can cause loss of a large area of skin and may form hypertrophic scars. These types of scars can restrict movement of muscles, joints and tendons (contracture). Surgery removes extra scar tissue. It may involve a series of small cuts (incisions) on both sides of the scar site, which create V-shaped skin flaps (Z-plasty). The result is a thin, less noticeable scar, because a Z-plasty may re-orient the scar so that it more closely follows the natural skin folds and releases tightness in the scar, but lengthens the scar during the process. Skin grafting involves taking a thin layer of skin from another part of the body and placing it over the injured area. Skin flap surgery involves moving an entire, full thickness of skin, fat, nerves, blood vessels, and muscle from a healthy part of the body to the injured site. These techniques are used when a large amount of skin has been lost in the original injury, when a thin scar will not heal, and when the main concern is improved function rather than improved appearance. Tissue expansion is used for breast reconstruction. It is also used for skin that has been damaged due to birth defects and injuries. A silicone balloon is inserted beneath the skin and gradually filled with salt water. This stretches the skin, which grows over time.





Surgeons can reshape the appearance of body parts through cosmetic surgery.  Some of the most common body parts people want to improve through surgery include: Breasts: Increase or reduce the size of breasts or reshape sagging breasts Ears: Reduce the size of large ears or set protruding ears back closer to the head Eyes: Correct drooping upper eyelids or remove puffy bags below the eyes Face: Remove facial wrinkles, creases or acne scars Hair: Fill in balding areas with one's own hair Nose: Change the shape of the nose Tummy:  Flatten the abdomen





There are many reasons to have surgery. Some operations can relieve or prevent pain. Others can reduce a symptom of a problem or improve some body function. Some surgeries are done to find a problem. For example, a surgeon may do a biopsy , which involves removing a piece of tissue to examine under a microscope. Some surgeries, like heart surgery , can save your life. Some operations that once needed large incisions (cuts in the body) can now be done using much smaller cuts. This is called laparoscopic surgery. Surgeons insert a thin tube with a camera to see, and use small tools to do the surgery. After surgery there can be a risk of complications, including infection, too much bleeding, reaction to anesthesia , or accidental injury. There is almost always some pain with surgery. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

A biopsy is a procedure that removes cells or tissue from your body.  A doctor called a pathologist looks at the cells or tissue under a microscope to check for damage or disease. The pathologist may also do other tests on it. Biopsies can be done on all parts of the body. In most cases, a biopsy is the only test that can tell for sure if a suspicious area is cancer.  But biopsies are performed for many other reasons too. There are different types of biopsies. A needle biopsy removes tissue with a needle passed through your skin to the site of the problem. Other kinds of biopsies may require surgery.

What is heart surgery? Heart surgery can correct certain heart problems when other treatments haven't worked or can't be used. In some cases, heart surgery may be a medical emergency. For example, surgery for a severe heart attack may need to be done right away. In other cases, you can plan heart surgery ahead of time. Some heart surgeries are major operations, such as heart bypass surgery for blocked arteries in the heart. Other surgeries are more minor heart procedures, such as putting in a pacemaker. What conditions does heart surgery treat? There are different types of heart surgery that can help treat many heart conditions: What conditions does heart surgery treat? What does the heart surgery do? Coronary artery disease (CAD) - when a sticky substance called plaque narrows or blocks the arteries that supply blood to your heart muscle. Makes a new path for blood to flow around the blocked part of an artery in the heart. This is called a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) , or heart bypass. It's the most common heart surgery in adults. Heart valve diseases - problems with the valves that control the flow of blood through your heart. Repairs heart valves. Replaces heart valves with a mechanical valve or a biologic valve made from pig, cow, or human heart tissue. Arrhythmia - problems with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. They are caused by changes in the electrical signals that control your heartbeat. Places a pacemaker or an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in the chest to correct your heartbeat. Treats atrial fibrillation with small cuts in the heart muscle. The cuts form scars that make a path for the heart's electrical signals (Maze surgery). Heart failure - when your heart is too weak or stiff to pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet your body's needs. Places a device in the chest which may include: An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) to help prevent sudden cardiac arrest . A biventricular pacemaker to coordinate the heart's pumping action so it's more powerful. A ventricular assist device to help the heart pump blood. A total artificial heart to pump blood for the heart. Replaces a seriously diseased heart with a heathy heart ( heart transplantation ). Heart aneurysm - a balloon-like bulge in the wall of an artery. It can be life-threatening if the aneurysm tears or bursts. Repairs or replaces the weak part of a heart artery using a patch or a tube made of fabric. Angina - chest pain from coronary artery disease. Uses a laser to make small channels through part of the heart muscle (transmyocardial laser revascularization). Damaged and abnormal heart structures, including congenital heart defects - heart structure problems that you're born with. Repairs heart damage or problems with how the heart and blood vessels are formed. Repairs depend on the type of defect or damage. What approaches do surgeons use to do heart surgery? The approach a surgeon uses to do heart surgery depends on your heart problem, your general health, and other factors. Approaches to heart surgery include: Open-heart surgery (also called traditional heart surgery) is when the surgeon cuts the chest open to reach the heart. Because it's difficult to operate on a beating heart, medicines are used to stop the heart. A heart-lung bypass machine keeps oxygen-rich blood pumping through the body during the surgery. Off-pump heart surgery is open-heart surgery on a beating heart without using a heart-lung bypass machine. The surgeon holds the heart steady with a device. Surgeons may use off-pump heart surgery to do coronary artery bypass grafts (CABG), but only in certain cases. Minimally invasive heart surgery uses small cuts between the ribs. The cuts may be as small as 2 to 3 inches. The surgeon inserts tools into the chest through the cuts. This type of heart surgery may or may not use a heart-lung bypass machine. Robotic-assisted surgery is a type of minimally invasive surgery. The surgeon uses a computer to control tools on the arms of a robot. This allows the surgeon to be very accurate when doing difficult operations. What are the risks of heart surgery? Like all surgery, heart surgery has risks even though the results are often excellent. The risks include: Bleeding Infection, fever , and swelling A problem from anesthesia (medicine that makes you sleep during surgery) Arrhythmia Damage to the heart, kidneys, liver, and lungs Stroke The risks of heart surgery tend to be higher if: The surgery is an emergency. You have other medical conditions, including: Diabetes Kidney diseases Lung diseases Peripheral artery disease (PAD) NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute



What is anesthesia? Anesthesia is the use of medicines to prevent pain during surgery and other procedures. These medicines are called anesthetics. They may be given by injection, inhalation, topical lotion, spray, eye drops, or skin patch. They cause you to have a loss of feeling or awareness. What is anesthesia used for? Anesthesia may be used in minor procedures, such as filling a tooth. It could be used during childbirth or procedures such as colonoscopies . And it is used during minor and major surgeries. In some cases, a dentist, nurse, or doctor may give you an anesthetic. In other cases, you may need an anesthesiologist. This is a doctor who specializes in giving anesthesia. What are the types of anesthesia? There are several different types of anesthesia: Local anesthesia numbs a small part of the body. It might be used on a tooth that needs to be pulled or on a small area around a wound that needs stitches.  You are awake and alert during local anesthesia. Regional anesthesia is used for larger areas of the body such as an arm, a leg, or everything below the waist. You may be awake during the procedure, or you may be given sedation. Regional anesthesia may be used during childbirth, a Cesarean section (C-section), or minor surgeries. General anesthesia affects the whole body. It makes you unconscious and unable to move. It is used during major surgeries, such as heart surgery , brain surgery, back surgery, and organ transplants . What are the risks of anesthesia? Anesthesia is generally safe. But there can be risks, especially with general anesthesia, including: Heart rhythm or breathing problems An allergic reaction to the anesthesia Delirium after general anesthesia. Delirium makes people confused. They may be unclear about what is happening to them. Some people over the age of 60 have delirium for several days after surgery. It can also happen to children when they first wake up from anesthesia. Awareness when someone is under general anesthesia. This usually means that the person hears sounds. But sometimes they can feel pain. This is rare.



Your surgeon will be very careful during surgery to limit the amount of blood you lose. But blood may continue to ooze from tissues that were cut, even after the operation is over. To replace this blood, you may be given a blood transfusion . This is a safe and common procedure, during which you receive blood through an intravenous (IV) line placed in one of your blood vessels. Several sources of blood are described here. Blood From the Public (Volunteer Blood Donation) The most common source of blood given during or after surgery is from volunteers in the general public. This kind of donation is called homologous blood donation. Your blood will be tested to make sure you receive the correct type of donor blood. Many communities have a blood bank where healthy people can donate blood. This blood is tested to see if it matches yours. You may have read about the danger of becoming infected with hepatitis, HIV, or other viruses after a blood transfusion. Blood transfusions are not 100% safe. But the current blood supply is thought to be safer now than ever. Donated blood is tested for many different infections, and the tests are very accurate. Also, blood centers keep a list of unsafe donors, so the risk of infection from blood transfusions is low. Donors answer a detailed list of questions about their health before they are allowed to donate. These questions include risk factors for infections that can be passed through their blood, such as sexual habits, drug use, and current and past travel history. Directed Donor Blood From a Family Member or Friend This method involves a family member or friend donating blood before your surgery. This blood is then set aside and held only for your use. Blood from these donors must be collected at least a few weeks before it is needed. The blood is tested to see if it matches yours and is also screened for infection. Most of the time, you need to arrange with your hospital or local blood bank before your surgery to have directed donor blood. It is important to note that there is no evidence that receiving blood from family members or friends is safer than receiving blood from the general public. Autologous Blood Donation (Your Own Blood) Although blood donated by the general public and used for most people is thought to be very safe, some people choose to use a method called autologous blood donation. Autologous blood is blood donated by you, which you later receive if you need a transfusion during or after surgery. You can have blood taken from 6 weeks to 5 days before your surgery. Your blood is stored and is good for a few weeks from the day it is collected. If your blood is not used during or after surgery, it is thrown away. If you wish to donate your own blood, you must make arrangements yourself. Your hospital may be set up to receive these donations and store the blood. Otherwise, your local blood bank may handle this process. Most of the time, you will need to pay for this process. Problems can arise with autologous blood donation. Donating this blood can make you anemic, or have a lower blood count, before your surgery. As a result, it is still possible that you will need to receive a blood transfusion with blood donated by the general public. In this case, your provider may suggest that you do not donate your own blood too close to your surgery date so that you have time to recover before surgery. In rare cases, a mistake by the blood center or the hospital can result in you receiving the wrong unit of blood. If this happens, you may have a reaction to the blood you receive. To help your body make more blood cells, your provider may ask you to take extra vitamins and minerals, including: Iron tablets Folic acid Vitamin C You may also get a medicine by injection to boost your blood count before surgery.Hsu YMS, Ness PM, Cushing MM. Principles of red blood cell transfusion. In: Hoffman R, Benz EJ, Silberstein LE, et al, eds. Hematology: Basic Principles and Practice . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 111. Miller RD. Blood therapy. In: Pardo MC, Miller RD, eds. Basics of Anesthesia . 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018:chap 24. U.S. Food and Drug Administration website. Blood and blood products. www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/blood-blood-products . Updated July 12, 2021. Accessed November 29, 2021.

Even if you have been to many doctors, you know more about your symptoms and health history than anyone else. Your health care providers depend on you to tell them things they need to know. Being healthy for surgery helps make sure the operation and your recovery go smoothly. Below are tips and reminders.Tell the doctors who will be involved with your surgery about: Any reactions or allergies you have had to medicines, foods, skin tapes, adhesive, iodine or other skin cleansing solutions, or latex Your use of alcohol (drinking more than 1 or 2 drinks a day) Problems you had before with surgery or anesthesia Blood clots or bleeding problems you have had Recent dental problems, such as infections or dental surgery Your use of cigarettes or tobacco If you get a cold, the flu, a fever, herpes breakout or another illness in the few days before surgery, call your surgeon right away. Your surgery may need to be rescheduled.

The quality of the health care you receive depends on many things besides the skill of your surgeon. Many health care providers at a hospital will be directly involved in your care before, during, and after surgery. The work of all the hospital staff affects how well the hospital functions. This affects your safety and the quality of the care you will receive there. CHOOSING THE BEST HOSPITAL FOR SURGERY A hospital can offer many things to improve the quality of care you receive. For instance, find out if your hospital has: A floor or unit that does only the type of surgery you are having. (For instance, for hip replacement surgery, do they have a floor or unit that is used only for joint-replacement surgeries?) Operating rooms that are used only for your type of surgery. Specific guidelines so that everyone who has your type of surgery receives the kind of care they need. Enough nurses. It can also be helpful to know how many surgeries like yours have been done at the hospital you have chosen or are considering for your surgery. People who have surgery at hospitals that do more of the same type of procedure often do better. If you are having a surgery that involves newer techniques, find out how many of these procedures your hospital has already done. It is important that you have these discussions with your surgeon before your procedure. HIGH-QUALITY MEASURES Hospitals are asked to report events called "quality measures." These measures are reports of different things that affect patient care. Some common quality measures include: Patient injuries, such as falls Patients who receive the wrong medicine or the wrong dosage of a medicine Complications, such as infections, blood clots, and pressure ulcers (bedsores) Readmission and death (mortality) rates Hospitals receive scores for their quality. These scores can give you an idea of how your hospital compares to other hospitals. Find out if your hospital is accredited by The Joint Commission (a nonprofit organization that seeks to improve the quality and safety of health care). Also see if your hospital is rated highly by state agencies or consumer or other groups. Some places to look for hospital ratings are: State reports -- some states require hospitals to report certain information to them, and some publish reports that compare hospitals in the state. Nonprofit groups in some areas or states work with businesses, doctors, and hospitals to gather information about quality. You can look for this information online. The government gathers and reports information about hospitals. You can find this information online at www.medicare.gov/hospitalcompare/search.html . You can also find information about choosing the best doctor online. Your health insurance company may rate and compare how different hospitals perform on the surgery you are having. Ask your insurance company if it does these ratings.Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services website. Hospital compare. www.cms.gov/medicare/quality-initiatives-patient-assessment-instruments/hospitalqualityinits/hospitalcompare.html . Updated October 1, 2020. Accessed January 7, 2021. The Leapfrog Group website. Choosing the right hospital. www.leapfroggroup.org/hospital-choice/choosing-right-hospital . Accessed January 7, 2021.



Laser surgery uses laser energy to treat the skin. Laser surgery can be used to treat skin diseases or cosmetic concerns such as sunspots or wrinkles.A laser is a light beam that can be focused on a very small area. The laser heats specific cells in the area being treated until they "burst." There are several types of lasers. Each laser has specific uses. The color of the light beam used is directly related to the type of surgery being performed and the color of the tissue being treated.

You may need surgery for a diabetes complication. Or, you may need surgery for a medical problem that is unrelated to your diabetes. Your diabetes may increase your risk for problems during or after your surgery, such as: Infection after surgery (especially at the site of the surgery) Healing more slowly Fluid, electrolyte , and kidney problems Heart problemsWork with your health care provider to come up with the safest surgery plan for you. Focus more on controlling your diabetes during the days to weeks before surgery. Your provider will do a medical exam and talk to you about your health. Tell your provider about all the medicines you are taking. If you take metformin, talk to your provider about stopping it. Sometimes, it should be stopped 48 hours before and 48 hours after surgery to decrease the risk of a problem called lactic acidosis. If you take other types of diabetes drugs, follow your provider's instructions if you need to stop the drug before surgery. Medicines called SGLT2 inhibitors (gliflozins) can increase the risk of blood sugar problems related to surgery. Tell your provider if you are taking one of these medicines. If you take insulin, ask your provider what dose you should take the night before or the day of your surgery. Make sure the provider knows whether you have type 1 or type 2 diabetes as the recommendations to adjust insulin are different. Your provider may have you meet with a dietitian, or give you a specific meal and activity plan to try to make sure your blood sugar is well-controlled for the week prior to your surgery. Some surgeons will cancel or delay surgery if your blood sugar is high when you arrive at the hospital for your surgery. Surgery is riskier if you have diabetes complications. So talk to your provider about your diabetes control and any complications you have from diabetes. Tell your provider about any problems you have with your heart, kidneys, or eyes, or if you have loss of feeling in your feet. The provider may run some tests to check the status of those problems.

Robotic surgery is a method to perform surgery using very small tools attached to a robotic arm. The surgeon controls the robotic arm with a computer.You will be given general anesthesia so that you are asleep and pain-free. The surgeon sits at a computer station and directs the movements of a robot. Small surgical tools are attached to the robot's arms. The surgeon makes small cuts to insert the instruments into your body. A thin tube with a camera attached to the end of it (endoscope) allows the surgeon to view enlarged 3-D images of your body as the surgery is taking place. The robot matches the doctor's hand movements to perform the procedure using the tiny instruments.

Quitting smoking and other nicotine products, including e-cigarettes, before surgery can improve your recovery and outcome after surgery. Most people who successfully quit smoking have tried and failed many times. Don't give up. Learning from your past tries can help you succeed.Tar, nicotine, and other chemicals from smoking can increase your risk for many health problems. These include heart and blood vessel problems, such as: Blood clots and aneurysms in the brain , which can lead to strokes Coronary artery disease, including chest pain (angina) and heart attacks High blood pressure Poor blood supply to the legs Problems with erections Smoking also increases your risk for different types of cancer, including cancer of the: Lungs Mouth Larynx Esophagus Bladder Kidneys Pancreas Cervix Smoking also leads to lung problems, such as emphysema and chronic bronchitis. Smoking also makes asthma harder to control. Some smokers switch to smokeless tobacco instead of quitting tobacco completely. But using smokeless tobacco still carries health risks, such as: Developing mouth or nasal cancer Gum problems, tooth wear, and cavities Worsening high blood pressure and chest pain

Your surgeon will want to make sure you are ready for your surgery. To do this, you will have some checkups and tests before surgery. Many different people on your surgery team may ask you the same questions before your surgery. This is because your team needs to gather as much information as they can to give you the best surgery results. Try to be patient if you are asked the same questions more than once.Pre-op is the time before your surgery. It means "before operation." During this time, you will meet with one of your doctors. This may be your surgeon or primary care doctor: This checkup usually needs to be done within the month before surgery. This gives your doctors time to treat any medical problems you may have before your surgery. During this visit, you will be asked about your health over the years. This is called "taking your medical history." Your doctor will also do a physical exam. If you see your primary care doctor for your pre-op checkup, make sure your hospital or surgeon gets the reports from this visit. Some hospitals also ask you to have a phone conversation or meet with an anesthesia pre-op nurse before surgery to discuss your health. You may also see your anesthesiologist the week before surgery. This doctor will give you medicine that will make you sleep and not feel pain during surgery.

Your child is scheduled to have surgery. Learn about what to expect on the day of surgery so that you will be prepared. If your child is old enough to understand, you can help them prepare as well. The doctor's office will let you know what time you should arrive on the day of surgery. This may be early in the morning. If your child is having minor surgery, your child will go home afterward on the same day. If your child is having major surgery, your child will stay in the hospital after the surgery.The anesthesia and surgery team will talk with you and your child before surgery. You may meet with them at an appointment before the day of surgery or on the same day of surgery. To make sure your child is healthy and ready for surgery, they will: Check your child's height, weight, and vital signs. Ask about your child's health. If your child is sick, the doctors may wait until your child is better to do the surgery. Find out about any medicines your child takes. Tell them about any prescription, over-the-counter (OTC), and herbal medicines. Do a physical exam on your child. To get your child ready for surgery, the surgical team will: Ask you to confirm the location and type of your child's surgery. The doctor will mark the site with a special marker. Talk to you about the anesthesia they will give your child. Get any needed lab tests for your child. Your child may have blood drawn or may be asked to give a urine sample. Answer any of your questions. Bring paper and pen to write down notes. Ask about your child's surgery, recovery, and pain management. You will sign admission papers and consent forms for your child's surgery and anesthesia. Bring these items with you: Insurance card Identification card Any medicine in the original bottles X-rays and test results

You are scheduled to have surgery. Learn about what to expect on the day of surgery so that you will be prepared. The doctor's office will let you know what time you should arrive on the day of surgery. This may be early in the morning. If you are having minor surgery, you will go home afterward on the same day. If you are having major surgery, you will stay in the hospital after the surgery.The anesthesia and surgery team will talk with you before surgery. You may meet with them at an appointment before the day of surgery or on the same day of surgery. Expect them to: Ask you about your health. If you are sick, they may wait until you are better to do the surgery. Go over your health history. Find out about any medicines you take. Tell them about any prescription, over-the-counter (OTC), and herbal medicines. Talk to you about the anesthesia you will get for your surgery. Answer any of your questions. Bring paper and pen to write down notes. Ask about your surgery, recovery, and pain management. Find out about insurance and payment for your surgery and anesthesia. You will need to sign admission papers and consent forms for surgery and anesthesia. Bring these items to make it easier: Insurance card Prescription card Identification card (driver's license) Any medicine in the original bottles X-rays and test results Money to pay for any new prescriptions







You may need an organ transplant if one of your organs has failed. This can happen because of illness or injury. When you have an organ transplant, doctors remove an organ from another person and place it in your body.  The organ may come from a living donor or a donor who has died. The organs that can be transplanted include: Heart Intestine Kidney Liver Lung Pancreas You often have to wait a long time for an organ transplant. Doctors must match donors to recipients to reduce the risk of transplant rejection. Rejection happens when your immune system attacks the new organ. If you have a transplant, you must take drugs the rest of your life to help keep your body from rejecting the new organ.













