If you are like many Americans, you drink alcohol at least occasionally. For many people, moderate drinking is probably safe. But drinking less is better for your health than drinking more. And there are some people who should not drink at all. Because drinking too much can be harmful, it's important to know how alcohol affects you and how much is too much. How does alcohol affect the body? Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant. This means that it is a drug that slows down brain activity. It can change your mood, behavior, and self-control. It can cause problems with memory and thinking clearly. Alcohol can also affect your coordination and physical control. Alcohol also has effects on the other organs in your body. For example, it can raise your blood pressure and heart rate. If you drink too much at once, it could make you throw up. Why are the effects of alcohol different from person to person? Alcohol's effects vary from person to person, depending on a variety of factors, including: How much you drank How quickly you drank it The amount of food you ate before drinking Your age Your sex Your race or ethnicity Your physical condition Whether or not you have a family history of alcohol problems What is moderate drinking? For most women, moderate drinking is no more than one standard drink a day For most men, moderate drinking is no more than two standard drinks a day Even though moderate drinking may be safe for many people, there are still risks. Moderate drinking can raise the risk of death from certain cancers and heart diseases. What is a standard drink? In the United States, a standard drink is one that contains about 14 grams of pure alcohol, which is found in: 12 ounces of beer (5% alcohol content) 5 ounces of wine (12% alcohol content) 1.5 ounces or a "shot" of distilled spirits or liquor (40% alcohol content) Who should not drink alcohol? Some people should not drink alcohol at all, including those who: Are recovering from an alcohol use disorder (AUD) or are unable to control the amount they drink Are under age 21 Are pregnant or trying to become pregnant Are taking medicines that can interact with alcohol Have medical conditions that get can worse if you drink alcohol Are planning on driving Will be operating machinery If you have questions about whether it is safe for you to drink, talk with your health care provider. What is excessive drinking? Excessive drinking includes binge drinking and heavy alcohol use: Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more. For a man, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For a woman, it is after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Heavy alcohol use is having having more than 4 drinks on any day for men or more than 3 drinks for women Binge drinking raises your risk of injuries, car crashes, and alcohol poisoning. It also puts you of becoming violent or being the victim of violence. Heavy alcohol use over a long period of time may cause health problems such as: Alcohol use disorder Liver diseases , including cirrhosis and fatty liver disease Heart diseases Increased risk for certain cancers Increased risk of injuries Heavy alcohol use can also cause problems at home, at work, and with friends. But treatment can help. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

What is alcohol use disorder (AUD)? For most adults, moderate alcohol use is probably not harmful. However, about 18 million adult Americans have an alcohol use disorder (AUD).  This means that their drinking causes distress and harm. AUD can range from mild to severe, depending on the symptoms. Severe AUD is sometimes called alcoholism or alcohol dependence. AUD is a disease that causes: Craving - a strong need to drink Loss of control - not being able to stop drinking once you've started Negative emotional state - feeling anxious and irritable when you are not drinking What is binge drinking? Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more. For a man, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For a woman, it is after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Not everyone who binge drinks has an AUD, but they are at higher risk for getting one. What are the dangers of too much alcohol? Too much alcohol is dangerous. Heavy drinking can increase the risk of certain cancers. It may lead to liver diseases , such as fatty liver disease and cirrhosis . It can also cause damage to the brain and other organs. Drinking during pregnancy can harm your baby . Alcohol also increases the risk of death from car crashes, injuries, homicide, and suicide. How do I know if I have an alcohol use disorder (AUD)? You may have an AUD if you can answer yes to two or more of these questions: In the past year, have you: Ended up drinking more or for a longer time than you had planned to? Wanted to cut down or stop drinking, or tried to, but couldn't? Spent a lot of your time drinking or recovering from drinking? Felt a strong need to drink? Found that drinking - or being sick from drinking - often interfered with your family life, job, or school? Kept drinking even though it was causing trouble with your family or friends? Given up or cut back on activities that you enjoyed just so you could drink? Gotten into dangerous situations while drinking or after drinking? Some examples are driving drunk and having unsafe sex. Kept drinking even though it was making you feel depressed or anxious? Or when it was adding to another health problem? Had to drink more and more to feel the effects of the alcohol? Had withdrawal symptoms when the alcohol was wearing off? They include trouble sleeping, shakiness, irritability, anxiety , depression , restlessness, nausea , and sweating . In severe cases, you could have a fever , seizures , or hallucinations. If you have any of these symptoms, your drinking may already be a cause for concern. The more symptoms you have, the more serious the problem is. What should I do if I think that I might have an alcohol use disorder (AUD)? If you think you might have an AUD, see your health care provider for an evaluation. Your provider can help make a treatment plan , prescribe medicines, and if needed, give you treatment referrals. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism



Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. There are many kinds of liver diseases: Diseases caused by  viruses, such as hepatitis A , hepatitis B , and hepatitis C Diseases caused by drugs, poisons, or too much alcohol. Examples include fatty liver disease and cirrhosis . Liver cancer Inherited diseases, such as hemochromatosis and Wilson disease Symptoms of liver disease can vary, but they often include swelling of the abdomen and legs, bruising easily, changes in the color of your stool and urine, and jaundice , or yellowing of the skin and eyes. Sometimes there are no symptoms. Tests such as imaging tests and liver function tests can check for liver damage and help to diagnose liver diseases.

What is fatty liver disease? Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. Fatty liver disease is a condition in which fat builds up in your liver. There are two main types: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) Alcoholic fatty liver disease, also called alcoholic steatohepatitis What is nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)? NAFLD is a type of fatty liver disease that is not related to heavy alcohol use. There are two kinds: Simple fatty liver, in which you have fat in your liver but little or no inflammation or liver cell damage. Simple fatty liver typically does not get bad enough to cause liver damage or complications. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), in which you have inflammation and liver cell damage, as well as fat in your liver. Inflammation and liver cell damage can cause fibrosis, or scarring, of the liver. NASH may lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer . What is alcoholic fatty liver disease? Alcoholic fatty liver disease is due to heavy alcohol use. Your liver breaks down most of the alcohol you drink, so it can be removed from your body. But the process of breaking it down can generate harmful substances. These substances can damage liver cells, promote inflammation, and weaken your body's natural defenses. The more alcohol that you drink, the more you damage your liver.  Alcoholic fatty liver disease is the earliest stage of alcohol-related liver disease. The next stages are alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Who is at risk for fatty liver disease? The cause of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is unknown. Researchers do know that it is more common in people who: Have type 2 diabetes and prediabetes Have obesity Are middle aged or older (although children can also get it) Are Hispanic, followed by non-Hispanic whites. It is less common in African Americans. Have high levels of fats in the blood, such as cholesterol and triglycerides Have high blood pressure Take certain drugs, such as corticosteroids and some cancer drugs Have certain metabolic disorders , including metabolic syndrome Have rapid weight loss Have certain infections, such as hepatitis C Have been exposed to some toxins NAFLD affects about 25% of people in the world. As the rates of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and high cholesterol are rising in the United States, so is the rate of NAFLD. NAFLD is the most common chronic liver disorder in the United States. Alcoholic fatty liver disease only happens in people who are heavy drinkers, especially those who have been drinking for a long period of time. The risk is higher for heavy drinkers who are women, have obesity, or have certain genetic mutations. What are the symptoms of fatty liver disease? Both NAFLD and alcoholic fatty liver disease are usually silent diseases with few or no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, you may feel tired or have discomfort in the upper right side of your abdomen. How is fatty liver disease diagnosed? Because there are often no symptoms, it is not easy to find fatty liver disease. Your doctor may suspect that you have it if you get abnormal results on liver tests that you had for other reasons. To make a diagnosis, your doctor will use: Your medical history A physical exam Various tests, including blood and imaging tests , and sometimes a biopsy As part of the medical history, your doctor will ask about your alcohol use, to find out whether fat in your liver is a sign of alcoholic fatty liver disease or nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFLD). He or she will also ask which medicines you take, to try to determine whether a medicine is causing your NAFLD. During the physical exam, your doctor will examine your body and check your weight and height. Your doctor will look for signs of fatty liver disease, such as: An enlarged liver Signs of cirrhosis, such as jaundice , a condition that causes your skin and whites of your eyes to turn yellow You will likely have blood tests, including liver function tests and blood count tests . In some cases you may also have imaging tests, like those that check for fat in the liver and the stiffness of your liver. Liver stiffness can mean fibrosis, which is scarring of the liver. In some cases you may also need a liver biopsy to confirm the diagnosis, and to check how bad the liver damage is. What are the treatments for fatty liver disease? Doctors recommend weight loss for nonalcoholic fatty liver. Weight loss can reduce fat in the liver, inflammation, and fibrosis. If your doctor thinks that a certain medicine is the cause of your NAFLD, you should stop taking that medicine.  But check with your doctor before stopping the medicine. You may need to get off the medicine gradually, and you might need to switch to another medicine instead. There are no medicines that have been approved to treat NAFLD. Studies are investigating whether a certain diabetes medicine or Vitamin E can help, but more studies are needed. The most important part of treating alcohol-related fatty liver disease is to stop drinking alcohol. If you need help doing that, you may want to see a therapist or participate in an alcohol recovery program. There are also medicines that can help, either by reducing your cravings or making you feel sick if you drink alcohol. Both alcoholic fatty liver disease and one type of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis) can lead to cirrhosis. Doctors can treat the health problems caused by cirrhosis with medicines, operations, and other medical procedures. If the cirrhosis leads to liver failure, you may need a liver transplant . What are some lifestyle changes that can help with fatty liver disease? If you have any of the types of fatty liver disease, there are some lifestyle changes that can help: Eat a healthy diet, limiting salt and sugar, plus eating lots of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains Get vaccinations for hepatitis A and B , the flu and pneumococcal disease . If you get hepatitis A or B along with fatty liver, it is more likely to lead to liver failure. People with chronic liver disease are more likely to get infections, so the other two vaccinations are also important. Get regular exercise , which can help you lose weight and reduce fat in the liver Talk with your doctor before using dietary supplements , such as vitamins , or any complementary or alternative medicines or medical practices . Some herbal remedies can damage your liver.

Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver. Scar tissue forms because of injury or long-term disease. Scar tissue cannot do what healthy liver tissue does - make protein, help fight infections, clean the blood, help digest food and store energy.   Cirrhosis can lead to  : Easy bruising or bleeding, or nosebleeds Swelling of the abdomen or legs Extra sensitivity to medicines High blood pressure in the vein entering the liver Enlarged veins called varices in the esophagus and stomach. Varices can bleed suddenly. Kidney failure Jaundice Severe itching Gallstones A small number of people with cirrhosis get liver cancer . Your doctor will diagnose cirrhosis with blood tests, imaging tests, or a biopsy. Cirrhosis has many causes. In the United States, the most common causes are chronic alcoholism and hepatitis . Nothing will make the scar tissue disappear, but treating the cause can keep it from getting worse. If too much scar tissue forms, you may need to consider a liver transplant . NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Alcohol can harm your baby at any stage during a pregnancy. That includes the earliest stages, before you even know you are pregnant. Drinking during pregnancy can cause a group of conditions called fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). Children who are born with FASD can have a mix of problems, such as medical, behavioral, educational, and social problems. The kinds of problems they have depend on which type of FASD they have. The problems could include : Abnormal facial features, such as a smooth ridge between the nose and upper lip Small head size Shorter-than-average height Low body weight Poor coordination Hyperactive behavior Difficulty with attention and memory Learning disabilities and difficulty in school Speech and language delays Intellectual disability or low IQ Poor reasoning and judgment skills Sleep and sucking problems as a baby Vision or hearing problems Problems with the heart, kidneys, or bones Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is the most serious type of FASD. People with fetal alcohol syndrome have facial abnormalities, including wide-set and narrow eyes, growth problems and nervous system abnormalities. Diagnosing FASD can be hard because there is no specific test for it. The health care provider will make a diagnosis by looking at the child's signs and symptoms and asking whether the mother drank alcohol during pregnancy. FASDs last a lifetime. There is no cure for FASDs, but treatments can help. These include medicines to help with some symptoms, medical care for health problems, behavior and education therapy, and parent training. A good treatment plan is specific to the child's problems. It should include close monitoring, follow-ups, and changes when needed. Certain "protective factors" can help reduce the effects of FASDs and help people who have them reach their full potential. They include: Diagnosis before 6 years of age Loving, nurturing, and stable home environment during the school years Absence of violence around them Involvement in special education and social services There is no known safe amount of alcohol during pregnancy. To prevent FASDs, you should not drink alcohol while you are pregnant, or when you might get pregnant. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What is anxiety? Anxiety is a feeling of fear, dread, and uneasiness. It might cause you to sweat, feel restless and tense, and have a rapid heartbeat.   It can be a normal reaction to stress. For example, you might feel anxious when faced with a difficult problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. It can help you to cope. The anxiety may give you a boost of energy or help you focus. But for people with anxiety disorders, the fear is not temporary and can be overwhelming. What are anxiety disorders? Anxiety disorders are conditions in which you have anxiety that does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships. What are the types of anxiety disorders? There are several types of anxiety disorders, including: Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). People with GAD worry about ordinary issues such as health, money, work, and family. But their worries are excessive, and they have them almost every day for at least 6 months. Panic disorder . People with panic disorder have panic attacks. These are sudden, repeated periods of intense fear when there is no danger. The attacks come on quickly and can last several minutes or more. Phobias . People with phobias have an intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Their fear may be about spiders, flying, going to crowded places, or being in social situations (known as social anxiety). What causes anxiety disorders? The cause of anxiety is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, stress , and your environment may play a role. Who is at risk for anxiety disorders? The risk factors for the different types of anxiety disorders can vary. For example, GAD and phobias are more common in women, but social anxiety affects men and women equally. There are some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders, including: Certain personality traits, such as being shy or withdrawn when you are in new situations or meeting new people Traumatic events in early childhood or adulthood Family history of anxiety or other mental disorders Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid problems or arrhythmia What are the symptoms of anxiety disorders? The different types of anxiety disorders can have different symptoms. But they all have a combination of: Anxious thoughts or beliefs that are hard to control. They make you feel restless and tense and interfere with your daily life. They do not go away and can get worse over time. Physical symptoms, such as a pounding or rapid heartbeat, unexplained aches and pains, dizziness , and shortness of breath Changes in behavior, such as avoiding everyday activities you used to do Using caffeine , other substances, and certain medicines can make your symptoms worse. How are anxiety disorders diagnosed? To diagnose anxiety disorders, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may also have a physical exam and lab tests to make sure that a different health problem is not the cause of your symptoms. If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation . Your provider may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. What are the treatments for anxiety disorders? The main treatments for anxiety disorders are psychotherapy (talk therapy), medicines, or both: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy that is often used to treat anxiety disorders. CBT teaches you different ways of thinking and behaving. It can help you change how you react to the things that cause you to feel fear and anxiety. It may include exposure therapy. This focuses on having you confront your fears so that you will be able to do the things that you had been avoiding. Medicines to treat anxiety disorders include anti-anxiety medicines and certain antidepressants . Some types of medicines may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders. You should work closely with your health care provider to identify which medicine is best for you. You may need to try more than one medicine before you can find the right one. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Depression is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. If you are one of the more than 19 million teens and adults in the United States who have depression, the feelings do not go away. They persist and interfere with your everyday life. Symptoms can include: Feeling sad or "empty" Loss of interest in favorite activities Overeating, or not wanting to eat at all Not being able to sleep, or sleeping too much Feeling very tired Feeling hopeless, irritable, anxious, or guilty Aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems Thoughts of death or suicide Depression is a disorder of the brain. There are a variety of causes, including genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors. Depression can happen at any age, but it often begins in teens and young adults. It is much more common in women. Women can also get postpartum depression after the birth of a baby. Some people get seasonal affective disorder in the winter. Depression is one part of bipolar disorder . There are effective treatments for depression, including antidepressants , talk therapy, or both. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What are nausea and vomiting? Nausea is when you feel sick to your stomach, as if you are going to throw up. Vomiting is when you throw up. What causes nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting can be symptoms of many different conditions, including: Morning sickness during pregnancy Gastroenteritis (infection of your intestines) and other infections Migraines Motion sickness Food poisoning Medicines, including those for cancer chemotherapy GERD (reflux) and ulcers Intestinal obstruction When do I need to see a health care provider for nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting are common. They are usually not serious. However, you should contact your health care provider immediately if you have: A reason to think that your vomiting is from poisoning Vomited for longer than 24 hours Blood in the vomit Severe abdominal pain Severe headache and stiff neck Signs of dehydration , such as dry mouth, infrequent urination or dark urine How is the cause of nausea and vomiting diagnosed? Your health care provider will take your medical history, ask about your symptoms and do a physical exam. The provider will look for signs of dehydration. You may have some tests, including blood and urine tests. Women may also have a pregnancy test. What are the treatments for nausea and vomiting? Treatments for nausea and vomiting depend on the cause. You may get treatment for the underlying problem. There are some medicines that can treatment nausea and vomiting. For severe cases of vomiting, you may need extra fluids through an IV (intravenous). There are things that you can do to feel better: Get enough fluids, to avoid dehydration. If you are having trouble keeping liquids down, drink small amounts of clear liquids often. Eat bland foods; stay away from spicy, fatty, or salty foods Eat smaller meals more often Avoid strong smells, since they can sometimes trigger nausea and vomiting If you are pregnant and have morning sickness, eat crackers before you get out of bed in the morning

Sweat is a clear, salty liquid produced by glands in your skin. Sweating is how your body cools itself. You sweat mainly under your arms and on your feet and palms. When sweat mixes with bacteria on your skin, it can cause a smell. Bathing regularly and using antiperspirants or deodorants can help control the odor. Sweating a lot is normal when it is hot or when you exercise, are anxious, or have a fever. It also happens during menopause. If you often sweat too much, it's called hyperhidrosis. Causes include thyroid or nervous system disorders, low blood sugar, or another health problem. Sweating too little, anhidrosis, can be life-threatening because your body can overheat. Causes of anhidrosis include dehydration, burns, and some skin and nerve disorders.

A fever is a body temperature that is higher than normal. A normal temperature can vary from person to person, but it is usually around 98.6 °F (37 °C). A fever is not a disease. It is usually a sign that your body is trying to fight an illness or infection. Infections cause most fevers. You get a fever because your body is trying to kill the virus or bacteria that caused the infection. Most of those bacteria and viruses do well when your body is at your normal temperature. But if you have a fever, it is harder for them to survive. Fever also activates your body's immune system. Other causes of fevers include: Medicines, including some antibiotics , blood pressure medicines , and anti-seizure medicines Heat illness Cancers Autoimmune diseases Some childhood vaccines Treatment depends on the cause of your fever. If the fever is very high, your health care provider may recommend taking an over-the-counter medicine such as acetaminophen or ibuprofen. Adults can also take aspirin, but children with fevers should not take aspirin. It is also important to drink enough liquids, to prevent dehydration .

Seizures are symptoms of a brain problem. They happen because of sudden, abnormal 
electrical activity in the brain. When people think of seizures, they often think of convulsions in which a person's body 
shakes rapidly and uncontrollably. Not all seizures cause convulsions. There are many types 
of seizures and some have mild symptoms. Seizures fall into two main groups. Focal 
seizures, also called partial seizures, happen in just one part of the brain. Generalized 
seizures are a result of abnormal activity on both sides of the brain. Most seizures last from 30 seconds to 2 minutes and do not cause lasting harm. However, 
it is a medical emergency if seizures last longer than 5 minutes or if a person has many 
seizures and does not wake up between them. Seizures can have many causes, including 
medicines, high fevers, head injuries and certain diseases.  People who have recurring 
seizures due to a brain disorder have epilepsy . NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

What is an alcohol use disorder? An alcohol use disorder (AUD) is drinking that causes distress and harm. It is a medical condition in which you: Drink alcohol compulsively Can't control how much you drink Feel anxious, irritable, and/or stressed when you are not drinking An AUD can range from mild to severe, depending on the symptoms. Severe AUD is sometimes called alcoholism or alcohol dependence. What are the treatments for alcohol use disorder? Most people with an alcohol use disorder can benefit from some form of treatment. Medical treatments include medicines and behavioral therapies. For many people, using both types gives them the best results. People who are getting treatment for AUD may also find it helpful to go to a support group such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). If you have an AUD and a mental illness, it is important to get treatment for both. Some people may need intensive treatment for AUD. They may go to a residential treatment center for rehabilitation (rehab). Treatment there is highly structured. It usually includes several different kinds of behavioral therapies. It may also include medicines for detox (medical treatment for alcohol withdrawal) and/or for treating the AUD. Which medicines can treat alcohol use disorder? Three medicines are approved to treat AUD: Disulfiram causes unpleasant symptoms such as nausea and skin flushing whenever you drink alcohol. Knowing that drinking will cause these unpleasant effects may help you stay away from alcohol. Naltrexone blocks the receptors in your brain that make you feel good when you drink alcohol. It can also reduce your craving for alcohol. This can help you cut back on your drinking. Acamprosate helps you avoid alcohol after you have quit drinking. It works on multiple brain systems to reduce your cravings, especially just after you have quit drinking. Your health care provider can help you figure out if one of these medicines is right for you. They are not addictive, so you don't have to worry about trading one addiction for another. They are not a cure, but they can help you manage AUD. This is just like taking medicines to manage a chronic disease such as asthma or diabetes. Which behavioral therapies can treat alcohol use disorder? Another name for behavioral therapies for AUD is alcohol counseling. It involves working with a health care professional to identify and help change the behaviors that lead to your heavy drinking.: Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) helps you identify the feelings and situations that can lead to heavy drinking. It teaches you coping skills, including how to manage stress and how to change the thoughts that cause you to want to drink. You may get CBT one-on-one with a therapist or in small groups. Motivational enhancement therapy helps you build and strengthen the motivation to change your drinking behavior. It includes about four sessions over a short period of time. The therapy starts with identifying the pros and cons of seeking treatment. Then you and your therapist work on forming a plan for making changes in your drinking. The next sessions focus on building up your confidence and developing the skills you need to be able to stick to the plan. Marital and family counseling includes spouses and other family members. It can help to repair and improve your family relationships. Studies show that strong family support through family therapy may help you to stay away from drinking. Brief interventions are short, one-on-one or small-group counseling sessions. It includes one to four sessions. The counselor gives you information about your drinking pattern and potential risks. The counselor works with you to set goals and provide ideas that may help you make a change. Is treatment for alcohol use disorder effective? For most people, treatment for an AUD is helpful. But overcoming an alcohol use disorder is an ongoing process, and you may relapse (start drinking again). You should look at relapse as a temporary setback, and keep trying. Many people repeatedly try to cut back or quit drinking, have a setback, then try to quit again. Having a relapse does not mean that you cannot recover. If you do relapse, it is important to return to treatment right away, so you can learn more about your relapse triggers and improve your coping skills. This may help you be more successful the next time. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism



Alcohol use disorder is when your drinking causes serious problems in your life, yet you keep drinking. You may also need more and more alcohol to feel drunk. Stopping suddenly may cause withdrawal symptoms .No one knows what causes problems with alcohol. Health experts think that it may be a combination of a person's: Genes Environment Psychology, such as being impulsive or having low self-esteem Long-term risks of drinking an excessive amount of alcohol are more likely if: You are a man who has more than 2 drinks per day, or 15 or more drinks a week, or often have 5 or more drinks at a time You are a woman who has more than 1 drink per day, or 8 or more drinks a week, or often have 4 or more drinks at a time One drink is defined as 12 ounces or 360 milliliters (mL) of beer (5% alcohol content), 5 ounces or 150 mL of wine (12% alcohol content), or a 1.5-ounce or 45-mL shot of liquor (80 proof, or 40% alcohol content). If you have a parent with alcohol use disorder, you are more at risk for alcohol problems. You also may be more likely to have problems with alcohol if you: Are a young adult under peer pressure Have depression, bipolar disorder , anxiety disorders , post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), or schizophrenia Can easily obtain alcohol Have low self-esteem Have problems with relationships Live a stressful lifestyle If you are concerned about your drinking, it may help to take a careful look at your alcohol use .

Alcohol withdrawal refers to symptoms that may occur when a person who has been drinking too much alcohol on a regular basis suddenly stops drinking alcohol.Alcohol withdrawal occurs most often in adults. But, it may also occur in teenagers or children. The more you drink regularly, the more likely you are to develop alcohol withdrawal symptoms when you stop drinking. You may have more severe withdrawal symptoms if you have certain other medical problems.

Alcoholic ketoacidosis is the buildup of ketones in the blood due to alcohol use. Ketones are a type of acid that form when the body breaks down fat for energy. The condition is an acute form of metabolic acidosis , a condition in which there is too much acid in body fluids.Alcoholic ketoacidosis is caused by very heavy alcohol use. It most often occurs in a malnourished person who drinks large amounts of alcohol every day.

Alcoholic liver disease is damage to the liver and its function due to alcohol abuse .Alcoholic liver disease occurs after years of heavy drinking. Over time, scarring and cirrhosis can occur. Cirrhosis is the final phase of alcoholic liver disease. Alcoholic liver disease does not occur in all heavy drinkers. The chances of getting liver disease go up the longer you have been drinking and more alcohol you consume. You do not have to get drunk for the disease to happen. The disease is common in people between 40 and 50 years of age. Men are more likely to have this problem. However, women may develop the disease after less exposure to alcohol than men. Some people may have an inherited risk for the disease.

Alcoholic neuropathy is damage to the nerves that results from excessive drinking of alcohol.The exact cause of alcoholic neuropathy is unknown. It likely includes both a direct poisoning of the nerve by the alcohol and the effect of poor nutrition associated with alcoholism. Up to half of long-term heavy alcohol users develop this condition. In severe cases, nerves that regulate internal body functions (autonomic nerves) may be involved.

Beriberi is a disease in which the body does not have enough thiamine (vitamin B1).There are two major types of beriberi: Wet beriberi: Affects the cardiovascular system. Dry beriberi and Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome : Affects the nervous system. Beriberi is rare in the United States. This is because most foods are now vitamin enriched. If you eat a normal, healthy diet, you should get enough thiamine. Today, beriberi occurs mostly in people who abuse alcohol. Drinking heavily can lead to poor nutrition. Excess alcohol makes it harder for the body to absorb and store vitamin B1. In rare cases, beriberi can be genetic. This condition is passed down through families. People with this condition lose the ability to absorb thiamine from foods. This can happen slowly over time. The symptoms occur when the person is an adult. However, this diagnosis is often missed. This is because health care providers may not consider beriberi in nonalcoholics. Beriberi can occur in infants when they are: Breastfed and the mother's body is lacking in thiamine Fed unusual formulas that don't have enough thiamine Some medical treatments that can raise your risk of beriberi are: Getting dialysis Taking high doses of diuretics (water pills)

Osmotic demyelination syndrome (ODS) is brain cell dysfunction. It is caused by the destruction of the layer ( myelin sheath ) covering nerve cells in the middle of the brainstem (pons).When the myelin sheath that covers nerve cells is destroyed, signals from one nerve to another aren't properly transmitted. Although the brainstem is mainly affected, other areas of the brain can also be involved. The most common cause of ODS is a quick change in the body's sodium levels. This most often occurs when someone is being treated for low blood sodium ( hyponatremia ) and the sodium is replaced too fast. Sometimes, it occurs when a high level of sodium in the body (hypernatremia) is corrected too quickly. ODS does not usually occur on its own. Most often, it's a complication of treatment for other problems, or from the other problems themselves. Risks include: Alcohol use Liver disease Malnutrition from serious illnesses Radiation treatment of the brain Severe nausea and vomiting during pregnancy

This article describes how to determine if you have a problem with alcohol use and offers advice on how to decide to quit drinking.Many people with drinking problems cannot tell when their drinking is out of control. You likely have a drinking problem when your body depends on alcohol to function and your drinking is causing problems with your health, social life, family, or job. Recognizing that you have a drinking problem is the first step toward being alcohol-free. Talk with your health care provider about your drinking. Your provider can help you find the best treatment.

Delirium tremens is a severe form of alcohol withdrawal . It involves sudden and severe mental or nervous system changes.Delirium tremens can occur when you stop drinking alcohol after a period of heavy drinking, especially if you do not eat enough food. Delirium tremens may also be caused by head injury, infection, or illness in people with a history of heavy alcohol use. It occurs most often in people who have a history of alcohol withdrawal. It is especially common in those who drink 4 to 5 pints (1.8 to 2.4 liters) of wine, 7 to 8 pints (3.3 to 3.8 liters) of beer, or 1 pint (1/2 liter) of "hard" alcohol every day for several months. Delirium tremens also commonly affects people who have used alcohol for more than 10 years.

Substance use harms the body in two ways: The substance itself affects the body. It causes negative lifestyle changes, such as irregular eating and poor diet. Proper nutrition can help the healing process. Nutrients supply the body with energy. They provide substances to build and maintain healthy organs and fight off infection.Recovery from substance use also affects the body in different ways, including metabolism (processing energy), organ function, and mental well-being. The impact of different drugs on nutrition is described below. OPIATES Opiates (including codeine, oxycodone, heroin, and morphine) affect the gastrointestinal system. Constipation is a very common symptom of substance use. Symptoms that are common during withdrawal include: Diarrhea Nausea and vomiting These symptoms may lead to a lack of enough nutrients and an imbalance of electrolytes (such as sodium, potassium, and chloride). Eating balanced meals may make these symptoms less severe (however, eating can be difficult, due to nausea). A high-fiber diet with plenty of complex carbohydrates (such as whole grains, vegetables, peas, and beans) is recommended. ALCOHOL Alcohol use is one of the major causes of nutritional deficiency in the United States. The most common deficiencies are of the B vitamins ( B1 , B6 , and folic acid ). A lack of these nutrients causes anemia and nervous system (neurologic) problems. For example, a disease called Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome ("wet brain") occurs when heavy alcohol use causes a lack of vitamin B1. Alcohol use also damages two major organs involved in metabolism and nutrition: the liver and the pancreas. The liver removes toxins from harmful substances. The pancreas regulates blood sugar and the absorption of fat. Damage to these two organs results in an imbalance of fluids, calories, protein, and electrolytes . Other complications include: Diabetes High blood pressure Permanent liver damage (or cirrhosis ) Seizures Severe malnutrition Shortened life expectancy A woman's poor diet when pregnant, especially if she drinks alcohol, can harm the baby's growth and development in the womb. Infants who were exposed to alcohol while in the womb often have physical and mental problems. The alcohol affects the growing baby by crossing the placenta. After birth, the baby may have withdrawal symptoms. Laboratory tests for protein , iron, and electrolytes may be needed to determine if there is liver disease in addition to the alcohol problem. Women who drink heavily are at high risk of osteoporosis and may need to take calcium supplements. STIMULANTS Stimulant use (such as crack, cocaine , and methamphetamine ) reduces appetite, and leads to weight loss and poor nutrition. Users of these drugs may stay up for days at a time. They may be dehydrated and have electrolyte imbalances during these episodes. Returning to a normal diet can be hard if a person has lost a lot of weight. Memory problems, which may be permanent, are a complication of long-term stimulant use. MARIJUANA Marijuana can increase appetite. Some long-term users may be overweight and need to cut back on fat, sugar, and total calories. NUTRITION AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF SUBSTANCE USE When a person feels better, they are less likely to start using alcohol and drugs again. Because balanced nutrition helps improve mood and health, it is important to encourage a healthy diet in a person recovering from alcohol and other drug problems. But someone who has just given up an important source of pleasure may not be ready to make other drastic lifestyle changes. So, it is more important that the person avoid returning to substance use than sticking with a strict diet. GUIDELINES Stick to regular mealtimes. Eat foods that are low in fat. Get more protein, complex carbohydrates , and dietary fiber. Vitamin and mineral supplements may be helpful during recovery (this may include B-complex, zinc, and vitamins A and C). A person with substance use is more likely to relapse when they have poor eating habits. This is why regular meals are important. Drug and alcohol addiction causes a person to forget what it is like to be hungry, and instead think of this feeling as a drug craving. The person should be encouraged to think that they may be hungry when cravings become strong. During recovery from substance use, dehydration is common. It is important to get enough fluids during and in between meals. Appetite usually returns during recovery. A person in recovery is often more likely to overeat, particularly if they were taking stimulants. It is important to eat healthy meals and snacks and avoid high-calorie foods with low nutrition, such as sweets. The following tips can help improve the odds of a lasting and healthy recovery: Eat nutritious meals and snacks. Get physical activity and enough rest. Reduce caffeine and stop smoking, if possible. Seek help from counselors or support groups on a regular basis. Take vitamin and mineral supplements if recommended by the health care provider.

Beer, wine, and liquor all contain alcohol. Drinking an excessive amount of alcohol can put you at risk for alcohol-related problems.Beer, wine, and liquor all contain alcohol. If you are drinking any of these, you are using alcohol. Your drinking patterns may vary, depending on who you are with and what you are doing. Drinking an excessive amount of alcohol can put you at risk for alcohol-related problems if: You are a man under 65 years old who has 15 or more drinks a week, or often have 5 or more drinks at a time. You are a woman or a man over 65 years old who has 8 or more drinks a week, or often have 4 or more drinks at a time. One drink is defined as 12 ounces (355 milliliters, mL) of beer, 5 ounces (148 mL) of wine, or a 1 1/2-ounce (44 mL) shot of liquor.

If you think a loved one has a drinking problem , you may want to help but don't know how. You may not be sure it really is a drinking problem. Or, you might be afraid that your loved one will get angry or upset if you say something. If you are concerned, do not wait to bring it up. The problem is likely to get worse, not better, if you wait.Drinking problems are not measured by the amount someone drinks or how often they drink. What matters the most is how drinking affects the person's life. Your loved one may have a drinking problem if they: Regularly drink more than they intended Cannot cut back on drinking Spend a lot of time getting alcohol, drinking alcohol, or recovering from the effects of alcohol Have trouble at work, home, or school because of alcohol use Have trouble with relationships because of drinking Miss important work, school, or social activities because of alcohol use

Deciding to quit drinking alcohol is a big step. You may have tried to quit in the past and are ready to try again. You may also be trying for the first time and are not sure where to start. While quitting alcohol is not easy, it helps to make a plan to quit and ask for the support of family and friends before you quit. Here are some tips to help get you started.There are a number of tools and resources to help you quit. You can try one option or combine them. Talk with your health care provider about which options may be best for you. Join a support group. Many people have quit alcohol by talking with others who face the same challenges. Some groups have online forums and chats as well as in-person meetings. Try a couple of groups and see what is most comfortable for you. Al-Anon -- al-anon.org Alcoholics Anonymous -- www.aa.org SMART Recovery -- www.smartrecovery.org Women for Sobriety -- womenforsobriety.org/ Work with an addiction counselor. Your provider can help you find a mental health specialist trained in working with people who have problems with alcohol. Ask about medicines. Several medicines can help you quit drinking by getting rid of the craving for alcohol and blocking its effects. Ask your provider if one may be a good choice for you. Treatment programs. If you have been a heavy drinker for a long time, you may need a more intensive program. Ask your provider to recommend an alcohol treatment program for you. If you have withdrawal symptoms , such as trembling hands, when you go without alcohol, you should not try to quit on your own. It may be life threatening. Work with your provider to find a safe way to quit.

We know much more about the effects of alcohol today than in the past. Yet, myths remain about drinking and drinking problems. Learn the facts about alcohol use so you can make healthy decisions.Being able to have a few drinks without feeling any effects may seem like a good thing. In fact, if you need to drink increasing amounts of alcohol to feel an effect, it could be a sign you have a problem with alcohol .

Pellagra is a disease that occurs when a person does not get enough niacin (one of the B complex vitamins) or tryptophan (an amino acid).Pellagra is caused by having too little niacin or tryptophan in the diet. It can also occur if the body fails to absorb these nutrients. Pellagra may also develop due to: Gastrointestinal diseases Weight loss (bariatric) surgery Anorexia Excessive alcohol use Carcinoid syndrome (group of symptoms associated with tumors of the small intestine, colon, appendix, and bronchial tubes in the lungs) Certain medicines, such as isoniazid, 5-fluorouracil, 6-mercaptopurine, pyrazinamide, hydantoin, ethionamide, phenobarbital, azathioprine, and chloramphenicol. The disease is common in parts of the world (certain parts of Africa) where people have a lot of untreated corn in their diet. Corn is a poor source of tryptophan, and niacin in corn is tightly bound to other components of the grain. Niacin is released from corn if soaked in limewater overnight. This method is used to cook tortillas in Central America where pellagra is rare.

A ketone blood test measures the amount of ketones in the blood. Ketones can also be measured with a urine test .A blood sample is needed.

Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome is a brain disorder due to vitamin B1 (thiamine) deficiency .Wernicke encephalopathy and Korsakoff syndrome are not different conditions. They are different stages of the same disease process. Both are due to brain damage caused by a lack of vitamin B1. Lack of vitamin B1 is common in people who have alcohol use disorder . It is also common in people whose bodies do not absorb food properly (malabsorption). This can sometimes occur with a chronic illness or after weight-loss (bariatric) surgery. Korsakoff syndrome tends to develop after symptoms of Wernicke encephalopathy go away. Wernicke encephalopathy causes brain damage in lower parts of the brain called the thalamus and hypothalamus. Korsakoff syndrome results from permanent damage to areas of the brain involved with memory.

Health care providers consider you to be drinking more than is medically safe when you: Are a healthy man up to age 65 and drink: 5 or more drinks on one occasion monthly, or even weekly More than 14 drinks in a week Are a healthy woman of all ages or a healthy man over age 65 and drink: 4 or more drinks on one occasion monthly, or even weekly More than 7 drinks in a weekWatch your drinking patterns more closely and plan ahead. This can help you cut back on your alcohol use. Keep track of how much you drink and set goals. Track how many drinks you have during the week on a small card in your wallet, on your calendar, or on your phone. Know how much alcohol is in a standard drink -- a 12 ounces (oz), or 355 milliliters (mL) can or bottle of beer, a 5 oz (148 mL) of wine, a wine cooler, 1 cocktail, or 1 shot of hard liquor. When you are drinking: Pace yourself. Have no more than 1 alcoholic drink per hour. Sip on water, soda, or juice in between alcoholic drinks. Eat something before drinking and in between drinks. To control how much you drink: Stay away from people or places that influence you to drink when you do not want to drink, or tempt you to drink more than you should. Plan other activities that do not involve drinking for days when you have the urge to drink. Keep alcohol out of your home. Make a plan to handle your urges to drink. Remind yourself of why you do not want to drink, or talk to someone you trust. Create a polite but firm way of refusing a drink when you are offered one.











Impaired driving is dangerous. It's the cause of more than half of all car crashes.  It means operating a motor vehicle while you are affected by: Alcohol Legal or illegal drugs Sleepiness Distractions, such as using a cell phone or texting Having a medical condition which affects your driving For your safety and the safety of others, do not drive while impaired.  Have someone else drive you or take public transportation when you cannot drive. If you need to take a call or send a text message, pull over. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

Alcohol is the most widely misused substance among America's youth. Drinking by young people has big health and safety risks. It is dangerous because it: Causes many deaths and injuries Can lead to poor decisions about engaging in risky behavior, such as drinking and driving or unprotected sex Increases the risk of physical and sexual assault Can lead to other problems, such as trouble in school May interfere with brain development Increases the risk of alcohol problems later in life Kids often begin drinking to look "cool" or fit in with their peers. Parents can help their kids avoid alcohol problems.  Open communication and conversations about drinking are important. So is being involved in your child's life. Get help for your child if you suspect a drinking problem. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism









When you are pregnant , you are not just "eating for two." You also breathe and drink for two. If you smoke, use alcohol or take illegal drugs, so does your unborn baby. To protect your baby, you should avoid: Tobacco. Smoking during pregnancy passes nicotine, carbon monoxide, and other harmful chemicals to your baby. This could cause many problems for your unborn baby's development. It raises the risk of your baby being born too small , too early , or with birth defects . Smoking can also affect babies after they are born. Your baby would be more likely to develop diseases such as asthma and obesity. There is also a higher risk of dying from sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Drinking alcohol. There is no known amount of alcohol that is safe for a woman to drink during pregnancy. If you drink alcohol when you are pregnant, your child could be born with lifelong fetal alcohol syndrome disorders (FASD). Children with FASD can have a mix of physical, behavioral, and learning problems. Illegal drugs. Using illegal drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamines may cause underweight babies, birth defects, or withdrawal symptoms after birth. Misusing prescription drugs. If you are taking prescription medicines, carefully follow your health care provider's instructions. It can be dangerous to take more medicines than you are supposed to, use them to get high, or take someone else's medicines. For example, misusing opioids can cause birth defects, withdrawal in the baby, or even loss of the baby. If you are pregnant and you are doing any of these things, get help. Your health care provider can recommend programs to help you quit. You and your baby's health depend on it. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

You're going to have a baby! It's an exciting time, but it can also feel a bit overwhelming.  You may have a lot of questions, including what you can do to give your baby a healthy start. To keep you and your baby healthy during pregnancy, it is important to: Have regular visits with your health care provider. These prenatal care visits help make sure that you and your baby are healthy. And if there are any health problems, your provider can find them early. Getting treatment right away can cure many problems and prevent others. Eat healthy and drink plenty of water. Good nutrition during pregnancy includes eating a variety of Fruits Vegetables Whole grains Lean meats or other protein sources Low-fat dairy products Take prenatal vitamins. Pregnant women need higher amounts of certain vitamins and minerals, such as folic acid and iron . Be careful with medicines. Always check with your health care provider before you start or stop any medicine . This includes over-the-counter medicines and dietary or herbal supplements. Stay active. Physical activity can help you stay strong, feel and sleep better, and prepare your body for birth. Check with your provider about which types of activities are right for you. Avoid substances that could hurt your baby, such as alcohol, drugs, and tobacco . Your body will keep changing as your baby grows . It can be hard to know whether a new symptom is normal or could be a sign of a problem . Check with your health care provider if something is bothering or worrying you.

What are the health effects of smoking? There's no way around it; smoking is bad for your health. It harms nearly every organ of the body, some that you would not expect. Cigarette smoking causes nearly one in five deaths in the United States. It can also cause many other cancers and health problems. These include: Cancers, including lung and oral cancers Lung diseases , such as COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) Damage to and thickening of blood vessels, which causes high blood pressure Blood clots and stroke Vision problems , such as cataracts and macular degeneration (AMD) Women who smoke while pregnant have a greater chance of certain pregnancy problems .   Their babies are also at higher risk of dying of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Smoking also causes addiction to nicotine, a stimulant drug that is in tobacco. Nicotine addiction makes it much harder for people to quit smoking. What are the health risks of secondhand smoke? Your smoke is also bad for other people - they breathe in your smoke secondhand and can get many of the same problems as smokers do. This includes heart disease and lung cancer. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have a higher risk of ear infections , colds , pneumonia , bronchitis, and more severe asthma . Mothers who breathe secondhand smoke while pregnant are more likely to have preterm labor and babies with low birth weight . Are other forms of tobacco also dangerous? Besides cigarettes, there are several other forms of tobacco. Some people smoke tobacco in cigars and water pipes (hookahs). These forms of tobacco also contain harmful chemicals and nicotine. Some cigars contain as much tobacco as an entire pack of cigarettes. E-cigarettes often look like cigarettes, but they work differently. They are battery-operated smoking devices. Using an e-cigarette is called vaping. Not much is known about the health risks of using them. We do know they contain nicotine, the same addictive substance in tobacco cigarettes. E-cigarettes also expose non-smokers to secondhand aerosols (rather than secondhand smoke), which contain harmful chemicals. Smokeless tobacco , such as chewing tobacco and snuff, is also bad for your health. Smokeless tobacco can cause certain cancers, including oral cancer. It also increases your risk of getting heart disease, gum disease , and oral lesions. Why should I quit? Remember, there is no safe level of tobacco use. Smoking even just one cigarette per day over a lifetime can cause smoking-related cancers and premature death. Quitting smoking can reduce your risk of health problems. The earlier you quit, the greater the benefit. Some immediate benefits of quitting include: Lower heart rate and blood pressure Less carbon monoxide in the blood (carbon monoxide reduces the blood's ability to carry oxygen) Better circulation Less coughing and wheezing NIH National Cancer Institute

Birth weight is the first weight of your baby, taken just after he or she is born.  A low birth weight is less than 5.5 pounds.  A high birth weight is more than 8.8 pounds. A low birth weight baby can be born too small, too early ( premature ), or both. This can happen for many different reasons.  They include health problems in the mother , genetic factors, problems with the placenta, and drug use by the mother . Some low birth weight babies may be more at risk for certain health problems. Some may become sick in the first days of life or develop infections. Others may suffer from longer-term problems such as delayed motor and social development or learning disabilities. High birth weight babies are often big because the parents are big, or the mother has diabetes during pregnancy.  These babies may be at a higher risk of birth injuries and problems with blood sugar. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Almost 1 of every 10 infants born in the United States are premature, or preemies. A premature birth is when a baby is born before 37 completed weeks of pregnancy. A full-term pregnancy is 40 weeks. Important growth and development happen throughout pregnancy - especially in the final months and weeks. Because they are born too early, preemies weigh much less than full-term babies. They may have health problems because their organs did not have enough time to develop. Problems that a baby born too early may have include: Breathing problems Feeding difficulties Cerebral palsy Developmental delay Vision problems Hearing problems Preemies need special medical care in a neonatal intensive care unit, or NICU.  They stay there until their organ systems can work on their own. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

What are birth defects? A birth defect is a problem that happens while a baby is developing in the mother's body.  Most birth defects happen during the first 3 months of pregnancy. One out of every 33 babies in the United States is born with a birth defect. A birth defect may affect how the body looks, works, or both. Some birth defects like cleft lip or neural tube defects are structural problems that can be easy to see. Others, like heart disease , are found using special tests. Birth defects can range from mild to severe. How a birth defect affects a child's life depends mostly on which organ or body part is involved and how severe the defect is. What causes birth defects? For some birth defects, researchers know the cause. But for many birth defects, the exact cause is unknown. Researchers think that most birth defects are caused by a complex mix of factors, which can include: Genetics. One or more genes might have a change or mutation that prevents them from working properly. For example, this happens in Fragile X syndrome . With some defects, a gene or part of the gene might be missing. Chromosomal problems. In some cases, a chromosome or part of a chromosome might be missing. This is what happens in Turner syndrome . In other cases, such as with Down syndrome , the child has an extra chromosome. Exposures to medicines , chemicals, or other toxic substances . For example, alcohol misuse can cause fetal alcohol spectrum disorders . Infections during pregnancy . For example, infection with Zika virus during pregnancy can cause a serious defect in the brain . Lack of certain nutrients. Not getting enough folic acid before and during pregnancy is a key factor in causing neural tube defects. Who is at risk of having a baby with birth defects? Certain factors may might increase the chances of having a baby with a birth defect, such as: Smoking, drinking alcohol, or taking certain "street" drugs during pregnancy Having certain medical conditions, such as obesity or uncontrolled diabetes , before and during pregnancy Taking certain medicines Having someone in your family with a birth defect. To learn more about your risk of having a baby with a birth defect, you can talk with a genetic counselor , Being an older mother, typically over the age of 34 years How are birth defects diagnosed? Health care providers can diagnose some birth defects during pregnancy, using prenatal testing .  That's why it important to get regular prenatal care . Other birth defects may not be found until after the baby is born. Providers may find them through newborn screening . Some defects, such as club foot, are obvious right away. Other times, the health care provider may not discover a defect until later in life, when the child has symptoms. What are the treatments for birth defects? Children with birth defects often need special care and treatments. Because the symptoms and problems caused by birth defects vary, the treatments also vary. Possible treatments may include surgery, medicines, assistive devices , physical therapy, and speech therapy. Often, children with birth defects need a variety of services and may need to see several specialists. The primary health care provider can coordinate the special care that the child needs. Can birth defects be prevented? Not all birth defects can be prevented. But there are things you can do before and during pregnancy to increase your chance of having a healthy baby: Start prenatal care as soon as you think you might be pregnant, and see your health care provider regularly during pregnancy Get 400 micrograms (mcg) of folic acid every day. If possible, you should start taking it at least one month before you get pregnant. Don't drink alcohol, smoke, or use "street" drugs Talk to your health care provider about any medicines you are taking or thinking about taking. This includes prescription and over-the-counter medicines, as well as dietary or herbal supplements. Learn how to prevent infections during pregnancy If you have any medical conditions, try to get them under control before you get pregnant Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) is the sudden, unexplained death of an infant younger than one year old. Some people call SIDS "crib death" because many babies who die of SIDS are found in their cribs. SIDS is the leading cause of death in children between one month and one year old.  Most SIDS deaths occur when babies are between one month and four months old. Premature babies, boys, African Americans, and American Indian/Alaska Native infants have a higher risk of SIDS. Although the cause of SIDS is unknown, there are steps you can take to reduce the risk. These include: Placing your baby on his or her back to sleep, even for short naps. "Tummy time" is for when babies are awake and someone is watching Having your baby sleep in your room for at least the first six months. Your baby should sleep close to you, but on a separate surface designed for infants, such as a crib or bassinet. Using a firm sleep surface, such as a crib mattress covered with a fitted sheet Keeping soft objects and loose bedding away from your baby's sleep area Breastfeeding your baby Making sure that your baby doesn't get too hot. Keep the room at a comfortable temperature for an adult. Not smoking during pregnancy or allowing anyone to smoke near your baby NIH: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development



Cocaine is a white powder. It can be snorted up the nose or mixed with water and injected with a needle. Cocaine can also be made into small white rocks, called crack. Crack is smoked in a small glass pipe. Cocaine speeds up your whole body. You may feel full of energy, happy, and excited. But then your mood can change. You can become angry, nervous, and afraid that someone's out to get you. You might do things that make no sense. After the "high" of the cocaine wears off, you can "crash" and feel tired and sad for days. You also get a strong craving to take the drug again to try to feel better. No matter how cocaine is taken, it is dangerous. Some of the most common serious problems include heart attack and stroke. You are also at risk for HIV/AIDS and hepatitis, from sharing needles or having unsafe sex. Cocaine is more dangerous when combined with other drugs or alcohol. It is easy to lose control over cocaine use and become addicted. Then, even if you get treatment, it can be hard to stay off the drug. People who stopped using cocaine can still feel strong cravings for the drug, sometimes even years later. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

Methamphetamine - meth for short - is a very addictive stimulant drug.  It is a powder that can be made into a pill or a shiny rock (called a crystal). The powder can be eaten or snorted up the nose. It can also be mixed with liquid and injected into your body with a needle. Crystal meth is smoked in a small glass pipe. Meth at first causes a rush of good feelings, but then users feel edgy, overly excited, angry, or afraid.  Meth use can quickly lead to addiction. It causes medical problems including: Making your body temperature so high that you pass out Severe itching "Meth mouth" - broken teeth and dry mouth Thinking and emotional problems NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

Many women need to take medicines while they are pregnant . But not all medicines are safe during pregnancy. Many medicines carry risks for you, your baby, or both. Opioids, especially when misused, can cause problems for you and your baby while you are pregnant. What are opioids? Opioids, sometimes called narcotics, are a type of drug. They include strong prescription pain relievers , such as oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, and tramadol. The illegal drug heroin is also an opioid. A health care provider may give you a prescription opioid to reduce pain after you have had a major injury or surgery. You may get them if you have severe pain from health conditions like cancer. Some health care providers prescribe them for chronic pain . Prescription opioids used for pain relief are generally safe when taken for a short time and as prescribed by your health care provider. However, opioid dependence, addiction , and overdose are still potential risks. These risks increase when these medicines are misused. Misuse means you are not taking the medicines according to your provider's instructions, you are using them to get high, or you are taking someone else's opioids. What are the risks of taking opioids during pregnancy? Taking opioids during pregnancy can cause problems for you and your baby. The possible risks include: Neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) - withdrawal symptoms (irritability, seizures, vomiting, diarrhea, fever, and poor feeding) in newborns Neural tube defects - birth defects of the brain, spine, or spinal cord Congenital heart defects - problems with the structure of the baby's heart Gastroschisis - a birth defect of the baby's abdomen, where the intestines stick outside of the body through a hole beside the belly button Loss of the baby, either miscarriage (before 20 weeks of pregnancy) or stillbirth (after 20 or more weeks) Preterm delivery - a birth before 37 weeks Stunted growth, leading to low birthweight Some women need to take opioid pain medicine while they are pregnant. If your health care provider suggests that you take opioids during pregnancy, you should first discuss the risks and benefits. Then if you both decide that you need to take the opioids, you should work together to try to minimize the risks. Some of the ways to do this include: Taking them for the shortest time possible Taking the lowest dose that will help you Carefully following your provider's instructions for taking the medicines Contacting your provider if you have side effects Going to all your follow-up appointments If I am already taking opioids and I become pregnant, what should I do? If you have been taking opioids and you become pregnant, contact your health care provider. You should not stop taking the opioids on your own. If you suddenly stop taking opioids, it could cause severe health problems for you or your baby. In some cases, stopping suddenly during pregnancy may be more harmful than taking the medicines. Can I breastfeed while taking opioids? Many women who regularly take opioid medicines can breastfeed. It depends on which medicine you are taking. Check with your health care provider before breastfeeding. There are some women who should not breastfeed, such as those who have HIV or take illegal drugs. What are the treatments for opioid use disorders in pregnancy? If you are pregnant and have an opioid use disorder, do not stop taking opioids suddenly. Instead, see your health care provider so you can get help. The treatment for opioid use disorder is medication-assisted therapy (MAT). MAT includes medicine and counseling: Medicine can reduce your cravings and withdrawal symptoms. For pregnant women, health care providers use either buprenorphine or methadone. Counseling , including behavioral therapies, which can help you Change your attitudes and behaviors related to drug use Build healthy life skills Continue taking your medicine and getting prenatal care



Pregnant women are strongly urged not to drink alcohol during pregnancy. Drinking alcohol while pregnant has been shown to cause harm to a baby as it develops in the womb. Alcohol used during pregnancy may also lead to long-term medical problems and birth defects.When a pregnant woman drinks alcohol, the alcohol travels through her blood and into the baby's blood, tissues, and organs. Alcohol breaks down much more slowly in the baby's body than in an adult. That means the baby's blood alcohol level remains increased longer than the mother's. This can harm the baby and can sometimes lead to lifelong damage. DANGERS OF ALCOHOL DURING PREGNANCY Drinking a lot of alcohol during pregnancy can lead to a group of defects in the baby known as fetal alcohol syndrome. Symptoms can include: Behavior and attention problems Heart defects Changes in the shape of the face Poor growth before and after birth Poor muscle tone and problems with movement and balance Problems with thinking and speech Learning problems These medical problems are lifelong and can range from mild to severe. Complications seen in the infant may include: Cerebral palsy Premature delivery Pregnancy loss or stillbirth HOW MUCH ALCOHOL IS SAFE? There is no known "safe" amount of alcohol use during pregnancy. Alcohol use appears to be the most harmful during the first 3 months of pregnancy; however, drinking alcohol anytime during pregnancy can be harmful. Alcohol includes beer, wine, wine coolers, and liquor. One drink is defined as: 12 oz of beer 5 oz of wine 1.5 oz of liquor How much you drink is just as important as how often you drink. Even if you don't drink often, drinking a large amount at 1 time can harm the baby. Binge drinking (5 or more drinks on 1 sitting) greatly increases a baby's risk of developing alcohol-related damage. Drinking moderate amounts of alcohol when pregnant may lead to miscarriage. Heavy drinkers (those who drink more than 2 alcoholic beverages a day) are at greater risk of giving birth to a child with fetal alcohol syndrome . The more you drink, the more you raise your baby's risk for harm. DO NOT DRINK DURING PREGNANCY Women who are pregnant or who are trying to get pregnant should avoid drinking any amount of alcohol. The only way to prevent fetal alcohol syndrome is to not drink alcohol during pregnancy. If you did not know you were pregnant and drank alcohol, stop drinking as soon as you learn you are pregnant. The sooner you stop drinking alcohol, the healthier your baby will be. Choose nonalcoholic versions of beverages you like. If you cannot control your drinking, avoid being around other people who are using alcohol. Pregnant women with alcoholism should join an alcohol abuse rehabilitation program . They should also be followed closely by a health care provider. The following organization may be of help: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration -- 1-800-662-4357 www.findtreatment.gov National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism -- www.rethinkingdrinking.niaaa.nih.gov/about.aspx

Maternal substance abuse may consist of any combination of drug, chemical, alcohol, and tobacco use during the pregnancy. While in the womb, a fetus grows and develops due to nourishment from the mother via the placenta. However, along with nutrients, any toxins in the mother's system may be delivered to the fetus. These toxins may cause damage to the developing fetal organs. A baby also may become dependent on substances used by the mother. WHAT ARE THE SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS SEEN IN AN INFANT OF A SUBSTANCE-ABUSING MOTHER? Babies born to substance-abusing mothers may have short- or long-term effects. Short-term withdrawal symptoms may consist only of mild fussiness. More severe symptoms may include acting irritable or jittery, feeding problems, and diarrhea. Symptoms vary depending on which substances were used. The diagnosis for babies with signs of withdrawal may be confirmed with drug tests of the baby's urine or stool. The mother's urine will also be tested. However, if urine or stool is not collected soon enough, the results may be negative. A sample of the umbilical cord may be tested. More significant long-term developmental problems may be seen in babies who are born with growth failure or various organ problems. Infants born to mothers who drink alcohol, even in modest amounts, are at risk for fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). This condition consists of growth problems, unusual facial features, and intellectual disability. It may not be detected at the time of birth. Other drugs may cause birth defects involving the heart, brain, bowel, or kidneys. Babies who have been exposed to drugs, alcohol, or tobacco are at higher risk for SIDS (sudden infant death syndrome) . WHAT IS THE TREATMENT FOR AN INFANT OF A SUBSTANCE-ABUSING MOTHER? The baby's treatment will depend on the drugs the mother used. Treatment may involve: Limiting noise and bright lights Maximizing "TLC" (tender loving care) including skin-to-skin care and breastfeeding with mothers who are in treatment/no longer using illicit substances, including marijuana Using medicines (in some cases) In the case of babies whose mothers used narcotics, the baby is most often given small doses of a narcotic at first. The amount is slowly adjusted as the baby is weaned off of the substance over days to weeks. Sedatives are sometimes used as well. Infants with organ damage, birth defects or developmental issues may need medical or surgical therapy and long-term therapies. These infants are more likely to grow up in homes that do not promote healthy, emotional, and mental development. They and their families will benefit from long-term support.IUDE; Intrauterine drug exposure; Maternal drug abuse; Maternal substance use; Maternal drug use; Narcotic exposure - infant; Substance use disorder - infant

Neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS) is a group of problems that occurs in a newborn who was exposed to opioid drugs for a length of time while in the mother's womb.NAS may occur when a pregnant woman takes drugs such as heroin, codeine, oxycodone (Oxycontin), methadone, or buprenorphine. These and other substances pass through the placenta that connects the baby to its mother in the womb. The baby becomes dependent on the drug along with the mother. If the mother continues to use the drugs within the week or so before delivery, the baby will be dependent on the drug at birth. Because the baby is no longer getting the drug after birth, withdrawal symptoms may occur as the drug is slowly cleared from the baby's system. Withdrawal symptoms also may occur in babies exposed to alcohol , benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and certain antidepressants (SSRIs) while in the womb. Babies of mothers who use opioids and other addictive drugs (nicotine, amphetamines, cocaine, marijuana, alcohol) may have long-term problems. While there is no clear evidence of a NAS for other drugs, they may contribute to the severity of a baby's NAS symptoms.



Every pregnancy has some risk of problems. You may have problems because of a health condition you had before you got pregnant. You could also develop a condition during pregnancy. Other causes of problems during pregnancy can include being pregnant with more than one baby , a health problem in a previous pregnancy, drug use during pregnancy , or being over age 35. Any of these can affect your health, the health of your baby , or both. If you have a chronic condition, you should talk to your health care provider about how to minimize your risk before you get pregnant . Once you are pregnant, you may need a health care team to monitor your pregnancy. Some common health problems that can complicate a pregnancy include: High blood pressure Polycystic ovary syndrome Kidney problems Autoimmune disorders Obesity HIV/AIDS Cancer Infections Other conditions that can make pregnancy risky can happen while you are pregnant - for example, gestational diabetes and Rh incompatibility . Good prenatal care can help detect and treat them. Some discomforts, like nausea, back pain, and fatigue, are common during pregnancy.  Sometimes it is hard to know what is normal. Call your health care provider if something is bothering or worrying you.















If you're like most people, you think that heart disease is a problem for others. But heart disease is the number one killer in the U.S. It is also a major cause of disability. There are many different forms of heart disease. The most common cause of heart disease is narrowing or blockage of the coronary arteries, the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart itself. This is called coronary artery disease and 
happens slowly over time. It's the major reason people have heart attacks . Other kinds of heart problems may happen to the valves in the heart, or the heart may not pump well and cause heart failure . Some people are born with heart disease. You can help reduce your risk of heart disease by taking steps to control factors that put you at greater risk: Control your blood pressure Lower your cholesterol Don't smoke Get enough exercise NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common type of heart disease. It is the leading cause of death in the United States in both men and women. CAD happens when the arteries that supply blood to heart muscle become hardened and narrowed. This is due to the buildup of cholesterol and other material, called plaque, on their inner walls. This buildup is called atherosclerosis . As it grows, less blood can flow through the arteries. As a result, the heart muscle can't get the blood or oxygen it needs. This can lead to chest pain ( angina ) or a heart attack .  Most heart attacks happen when a blood clot suddenly cuts off the hearts' blood supply, causing permanent heart damage. Over time, CAD can also weaken the heart muscle and contribute to heart failure and arrhythmias . Heart failure means the heart can't pump blood well to the rest of the body. Arrhythmias are changes in the normal beating rhythm of the heart. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Each year almost 800,000 Americans have a heart attack. A heart attack happens when blood flow to the heart suddenly becomes blocked. Without the blood coming in, the heart can't get oxygen. If not treated quickly, the heart muscle begins to die. But if you do get quick treatment, you may be able to prevent or limit damage to the heart muscle. That's why it's important to know the symptoms of a heart attack and call 911 if you or someone else is having them. You should call, even if you are not sure that it is a heart attack. The most common symptoms in men and women are: Chest discomfort. It is often in center or left side of the chest. It usually lasts more than a few minutes. It may go away and come back. It can feel like pressure, squeezing, fullness, or pain . It also can feel like heartburn or indigestion. Shortness of breath. Sometimes this is your only symptom. You may get it before or during the chest discomfort. It can happen when you are resting or doing a little bit of physical activity. Discomfort in the upper body. You may feel pain or discomfort in one or both arms, the back, shoulders, neck, jaw, or upper part of the stomach. You may also have other symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and lightheadedness. You may break out in a cold sweat. Sometimes women will have different symptoms then men. For example, they are more likely to feel tired for no reason. The most common cause of heart attacks is coronary artery disease (CAD). With CAD, there is a buildup of cholesterol and other material, called plaque, on their inner walls or the arteries. This is atherosclerosis . It can build up for years. Eventually an area of plaque can rupture (break open). A blood clot can form around the plaque and block the artery. A less common cause of heart attack is a severe spasm (tightening) of a coronary artery. The spasm cuts off blood flow through the artery. At the hospital, health care providers make a diagnosis based on your symptoms, blood tests, and different heart health tests . Treatments may include medicines and medical procedures such as coronary angioplasty . After a heart attack, cardiac rehabilitation and lifestyle changes can help you recover. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Your heart has four valves. Normally, these valves open to let blood flow through or out of your heart, and then shut to keep it from flowing backward. But sometimes they don't work properly. If they don't, you could have: Regurgitation - when blood leaks back through the valve in the wrong direction Mitral valve prolapse - when one of the valves, the mitral valve, has "floppy" flaps and doesn't close tightly. It's one of the most common heart valve conditions. Sometimes it causes regurgitation. Stenosis - when the valve doesn't open enough and blocks blood flow Valve problems can be present at birth or caused by infections, heart attacks, or heart disease or damage. The main sign of heart valve disease is an unusual heartbeat sound called a heart murmur. Your doctor can hear a heart murmur with a stethoscope. But many people have heart murmurs without having a problem. Heart tests can show if you have a heart valve disease. Some valve problems are minor and do not need treatment. Others might require medicine, medical procedures, or surgery to repair or replace the valve. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. Heart failure does not mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop working. It means that your heart is not able to pump blood the way it should. It can affect one or both sides of the heart. The weakening of the heart's pumping ability causes: Blood and fluid to back up into the lungs The buildup of fluid in the feet, ankles and legs - called edema Tiredness and shortness of breath Common causes of heart failure are coronary artery disease , high blood pressure and diabetes . It is more common in people who are 65 years old or older, African Americans, people who are overweight, and people who have had a heart attack. Men have a higher rate of heart failure than women. Your doctor will diagnose heart failure by doing a physical exam and heart tests. Treatment includes treating the underlying cause of your heart failure, medicines, and heart transplantation if other treatments fail. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A congenital heart defect is a problem with the structure of the heart. It is present at birth. Congenital heart defects are the most common type of birth defect. The defects can involve the walls of the heart, the valves of the heart, and the arteries and veins near the heart. They can disrupt the normal flow of blood through the heart. The blood flow can slow down, go in the wrong direction or to the wrong place, or be blocked completely. Doctors use a physical exam and special heart tests to diagnose congenital heart defects. They often find severe defects during pregnancy or soon after birth. Signs and symptoms of severe defects in newborns include: Rapid breathing Cyanosis - a bluish tint to the skin, lips, and fingernails Fatigue Poor blood circulation Many congenital heart defects cause few or no signs and symptoms. They are often not diagnosed until children are older. Many children with congenital heart defects don't need treatment, but others do. Treatment can include medicines, catheter procedures, surgery, and heart transplants. The treatment depends on the type of the defect, how severe it is, and a child's age, size, and general health. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

More than 1 in 3 adults in the U.S. has high blood pressure , or hypertension. Many of those people don't know they have it, because there are usually no warning signs. This can be dangerous, because high blood pressure can lead to life-threatening conditions like heart attack or stroke . The good news is that you can often prevent or treat high blood pressure. Early diagnosis and heart-healthy lifestyle changes can keep high blood pressure from seriously damaging your health. What is blood pressure? Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is called diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually the systolic number comes before or above the diastolic number. For example, 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80. How is high blood pressure diagnosed? High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regular blood pressure checks from your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. He or she will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis. Blood Pressure Category Systolic Blood Pressure Diastolic Blood Pressure Normal Less than 120 and Less than 80 High Blood Pressure (no other heart risk factors) 140 or higher or 90 or higher High Blood Pressure (with other heart risk factors, according to some providers) 130 or higher or 80 or higher Dangerously high blood pressure - seek medical care right away 180 or higher and 120 or higher For children and teens, the health care provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and gender. People with diabetes or chronic kidney disease should keep their blood pressure below 130/80. Who is at risk for high blood pressure? Anyone can develop high blood pressure, but there are certain factors that can increase your risk: Age - Blood pressure tends to rise with age Race/Ethnicity - High blood pressure is more common in African American adults Weight - People who are overweight or have obesity are more likely to develop high blood pressure Sex - Before age 55, men are more likely than women to develop high blood pressure. After age 55, women are more likely than men to develop it. Lifestyle - Certain lifestyle habits can raise your risk for high blood pressure, such as eating too much sodium (salt) or not enough potassium, lack of exercise, drinking too much alcohol, and smoking. Family history - A family history of high blood pressure raises the risk of developing high blood pressure How can I prevent high blood pressure? You can help prevent high blood pressure by having a healthy lifestyle. This means: Eating a healthy diet. To help manage your blood pressure, you should limit the amount of sodium (salt) that you eat and increase the amount of potassium in your diet. It is also important to eat foods that are lower in fat, as well as plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. The DASH eating plan is an example of an eating plan that can help you to lower your blood pressure. Getting regular exercise. Exercise can help you maintain a healthy weight and lower your blood pressure. You should try to get moderate-intensity aerobic exercise at least 2 and a half hours per week, or vigorous-intensity aerobic exercise for 1 hour and 15 minutes per week. Aerobic exercise, such as brisk walking, is any exercise in which your heart beats harder and you use more oxygen than usual. Being at a healthy weight. Being overweight or having obesity increases your risk for high blood pressure. Maintaining a healthy weight can help you control high blood pressure and reduce your risk for other health problems. Limiting alcohol. Drinking too much alcohol can raise your blood pressure. It also adds extra calories, which may cause weight gain. Men should have no more than two drinks per day, and women only one. Not smoking. Cigarette smoking raises your blood pressure and puts you at higher risk for heart attack and stroke. If you do not smoke, do not start. If you do smoke, talk to your health care provider for help in finding the best way for you to quit . Managing stress. Learning how to relax and manage stress can improve your emotional and physical health and lower high blood pressure. Stress management techniques include exercising, listening to music, focusing on something calm or peaceful, and meditating. If you already have high blood pressure, it is important to prevent it from getting worse or causing complications. You should get regular medical care and follow your prescribed treatment plan. Your plan will include healthy lifestyle habit recommendations and possibly medicines . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is cholesterol? Your body needs some cholesterol to work properly. But if you have too much in your blood, it can stick to the walls of your arteries and narrow or even block them. This puts you at risk for coronary artery disease and other heart diseases . Cholesterol travels through the blood on proteins called lipoproteins. One type, LDL , is sometimes called the "bad" cholesterol. A high LDL level leads to a buildup of cholesterol in your arteries. Another type, HDL , is sometimes called the "good" cholesterol. It carries cholesterol from other parts of your body back to your liver. Then your liver removes the cholesterol from your body. There are steps that you can take to lower your LDL (bad) cholesterol and raise your HDL (good) cholesterol. By keeping your cholesterol levels in range , you can lower your risk of heart diseases. What are the treatments for high cholesterol? The main treatments for high cholesterol are lifestyle changes and medicines. Lifestyle changes to lower cholesterol Heart-healthy lifestyle changes that can help you lower or control your cholesterol include: Heart-healthy eating. A heart-healthy eating plan limits the amount of saturated and trans fats that you eat. It recommends that you eat and drink only enough calories to stay at a healthy weight and avoid weight gain . It encourages you to choose a variety of nutritious foods, including fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and lean meats. Examples of eating plans that can lower your cholesterol include the Therapeutic Lifestyle Changes diet and the DASH eating plan . Weight Management. If you are overweight, losing weight can help lower your LDL (bad) cholesterol. This is especially important for people with metabolic syndrome . Metabolic syndrome is a group of risk factors that includes high triglyceride levels, low HDL (good) cholesterol levels, and being overweight with a large waist measurement (more than 40 inches for men and more than 35 inches for women). Physical Activity. Everyone should get regular physical activity (30 minutes on most, if not all, days). Managing stress. Research has shown that chronic stress can sometimes raise your LDL cholesterol and lower your HDL cholesterol. Quitting smoking. Quitting smoking can raise your HDL cholesterol. Since HDL helps to remove LDL cholesterol from your arteries, having more HDL can help to lower your LDL cholesterol. Medicines to lower cholesterol For some people, making lifestyle changes alone does not their lower cholesterol enough. They may also need to take medicines. There are several types of cholesterol-lowering drugs available. They work in different ways and can have different side effects. Talk to your health care provider about which medicine is right for you. Even if you take medicines to lower your cholesterol, you still need to continue with lifestyle changes. Lipoprotein apheresis to lower cholesterol Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an inherited form of high cholesterol. Some people who have FH may get a treatment called lipoprotein apheresis. This treatment uses a filtering machine to remove LDL cholesterol from the blood. Then the machine returns the rest of the blood back to the person. Supplements to lower cholesterol Some companies sell supplements that they say can lower cholesterol. Researchers have studied many of these supplements, including red yeast rice, flaxseed, and garlic. At this time, there isn't conclusive evidence that any of them are effective in lowering cholesterol levels. Also, supplements may cause side effects and interactions with medicines. Always check with your health care provider before you take any supplements.

Regular exercise is one of the best things you can do for your health. It has many benefits . It can improve your overall health and fitness and reduce your risk for many chronic diseases.To get the most benefit, here's how much physical activity you should get: For adults: Get at least 150 minutes of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous-intensity aerobic physical activity each week. Or you could do a combination of the two. : Try to spread your physical activity out over several days of the week. That's better than trying to do it all in one or two days. Some days you may not have long blocks of time to do physical activity. You can try splitting it up into segments of ten minutes or more. Aerobic activities include walking fast, jogging, swimming, and biking Moderate intensity means that while you are doing that activity, you should be able to say a few words in a row but not sing Vigorous intensity means that while you are doing that activity, you won't be able to say more than a few words without stopping for a breath Also, do strengthening activities twice per week. : Strengthening activities include lifting weights, working with exercise bands, and doing sit-ups and pushups Choose activities that work all the different parts of the body - your legs, hips, back, chest, stomach, shoulders, and arms. You should repeat exercises for each muscle group 8 to 12 times per session. For preschool-aged children (ages 3-5): Preschool children should be physically active throughout the day, to help with their growth and development. They should get both structured and unstructured active play. Structured play has a goal and is directed by an adult. Examples include playing a sport or a game. Unstructured play is creative free play, such as playing on a playground. For children and teens: Get 60 minutes or more of physical activity every day. Most of it should be moderate-intensity aerobic activity. : Activities should vary and be a good fit for the child's age and physical development Moderate-intensity aerobic activities include walking, running, skipping, playing on the playground, playing basketball, and biking Also, try to get each of these at least 3 days a week: vigorous-intensity aerobic activity, muscle-strengthening activity, and bone-strengthening activity. : Vigorous-intensity aerobic activities include running, doing jumping jacks, and fast swimming Muscle-strengthening activities include playing on playground equipment, playing tug-of-war, and doing pushups and pull-ups Bone-strengthening activities include hopping, skipping, doing jumping jacks, playing volleyball, and working with resistance bands For older adults, pregnant women, and people with chronic health problems: Older adults , pregnant women, and people who have special health needs should check with their health care provider on how much physical activity they should get and what types of activities they should do. Exercise tips: People who are trying to lose weight may need to get more physical activity. They also need to adjust their diet, so they are burning more calories than they eat and drink. If you have been inactive, you may need to start slowly. You can keep adding more gradually. The more you can do, the better. But try not to feel overwhelmed, and do what you can. Getting some physical activity is always better than getting none. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute



Some changes in the heart and blood vessels normally occur with age. However, many other changes that are common with aging are due to or worsened by modifiable factors. If not treated, these can lead to heart disease. BACKGROUND The heart has two sides. The right side pumps blood to the lungs to receive oxygen and get rid of carbon dioxide. The left side pumps oxygen-rich blood to the body. Blood flows out of the heart, first through the aorta, then through arteries, which branch out and get smaller and smaller as they go into the tissues. In the tissues, they become tiny capillaries. Capillaries are where the blood gives up oxygen and nutrients to the tissues, and receives carbon dioxide and wastes back from the tissues. Then, the vessels begin to collect together into larger and larger veins, which return blood to the heart. Watch this video about: Blood flow AGING CHANGES Heart: The heart has a natural pacemaker system that controls the heartbeat. Some of the pathways of this system may develop fibrous tissue and fat deposits. The natural pacemaker (the sinoatrial or SA node) loses some of its cells. These changes may result in a slightly slower heart rate . A slight increase in the size of the heart, especially the left ventricle occurs in some people. The heart wall thickens, so the amount of blood that the chamber can hold may actually decrease despite the increased overall heart size. The heart may fill more slowly. Heart changes often cause the electrocardiogram ( ECG ) of a normal, healthy older person to be slightly different than the ECG of a healthy younger adult. Abnormal rhythms ( arrhythmias ), such as atrial fibrillation , are more common in older people. They may be caused by several types of heart disease. Normal changes in the heart include deposits of the "aging pigment," lipofuscin . The heart muscle cells degenerate slightly. The valves inside the heart, which control the direction of blood flow, thicken and become stiffer. A heart murmur caused by valve stiffness is fairly common in older people. Blood vessels: Receptors called baroreceptors monitor the blood pressure and make changes to help maintain a fairly constant blood pressure when a person changes positions or is doing other activities. The baroreceptors become less sensitive with aging. This may explain why many older people have orthostatic hypotension, a condition in which the blood pressure falls when a person goes from lying or sitting to standing. This causes dizziness because there is less blood flow to the brain. The capillary walls thicken slightly. This may cause a slightly slower rate of exchange of nutrients and wastes. The main artery from the heart (aorta) becomes thicker, stiffer, and less flexible. This is probably related to changes in the connective tissue of the blood vessel wall. This makes the blood pressure higher and makes the heart work harder, which may lead to thickening of the heart muscle (hypertrophy). The other arteries also thicken and stiffen. In general, most older people have a moderate increase in blood pressure. Blood: The blood itself changes slightly with age. Normal aging causes a reduction in total body water. As part of this, there is less fluid in the bloodstream, so blood volume decreases. The speed with which red blood cells are produced in response to stress or illness is reduced. This creates a slower response to blood loss and anemia. Most of the white blood cells stay at the same levels, although certain white blood cells important to immunity ( neutrophils ) decrease in their number and ability to fight off bacteria. This reduces the ability to resist infection. EFFECT OF CHANGES Normally, the heart continues to pump enough blood to supply all parts of the body. However, an older heart may not be able to pump blood as well when you make it work harder. Some of the things that make your heart work harder are: Certain medicines Emotional stress Physical exertion Illness Infections Injuries COMMON PROBLEMS Angina (chest pain caused by temporarily reduced blood flow to the heart muscle), shortness of breath with exertion, and heart attack can result from coronary artery disease. Abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) of various types can occur. Anemia may occur, possibly related to malnutrition, chronic infections, blood loss from the gastrointestinal tract, or as a complication of other diseases or medicines. Arteriosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) is very common. Fatty plaque deposits inside the blood vessels cause them to narrow and totally block blood vessels. Congestive heart failure is also very common in older people. In people older than 75, congestive heart failure occurs 10 times more often than in younger adults. Coronary artery disease is fairly common. It is often a result of atherosclerosis. High blood pressure and orthostatic hypotension are more common with older age. Older people on blood pressure medicines need to work with their doctor to find the best way to manage their high blood pressure. This is because too much medicine may cause low blood pressure and could lead to a fall. Heart valve diseases are fairly common. Aortic stenosis , or narrowing of the aortic valve, is the most common valve disease in older adults. Transient ischemic attacks ( TIA ) or strokes can occur if blood flow to the brain is disrupted. Other problems with the heart and blood vessels include the following: Blood clots Deep vein thrombosis Thrombophlebitis Peripheral vascular disease , resulting in intermittent pain in the legs when walking (claudication) Varicose veins Aneurysms may develop in one of the major arteries from the heart or in the brain. Aneurysms are an abnormal widening or ballooning of a part of an artery due to weakness in the wall of the blood vessel. If an aneurysm bursts it may cause bleeding and death. PREVENTION You can help your circulatory system (heart and blood vessels). Heart disease risk factors that you have some control over include high blood pressure, cholesterol levels, diabetes, obesity, and smoking. Eat a heart-healthy diet with reduced amounts of saturated fat and cholesterol, and control your weight. Follow your health care provider's recommendations for treating high blood pressure, high cholesterol or diabetes. Reduce or stop smoking. Men between the ages of 65 to 75 who have ever smoked should be screened for aneurysms in their abdominal aorta usually with an ultrasound exam. Get more exercise: Exercise may help prevent obesity, and it helps people with diabetes control their blood sugar. Exercise may help you maintain your abilities as much as possible, and it reduces stress. Moderate exercise is one of the best things you can do to keep your heart, and the rest of your body, healthy. Consult with your provider before beginning a new exercise program. Exercise moderately and within your capabilities, but do it regularly. People who exercise often have less body fat and smoke less than people who do not exercise. They also tend to have fewer blood pressure problems and less heart disease. Have regular check-ups for your heart: Have your blood pressure checked every year. If you have diabetes, heart disease, kidney problems, or certain other conditions, your blood pressure may need to be monitored more closely. If your cholesterol level is normal, have it rechecked every 5 years. If you have diabetes, heart disease, kidney problems, or certain other conditions, your cholesterol may need to be monitored more closely.Heart disease - aging; Atherosclerosis - aging

Current guidelines recommend that people with coronary artery disease (CAD) receive antiplatelet therapy with either aspirin or clopidogrel . Aspirin therapy is very helpful for people with CAD or a history of stroke. If you have been diagnosed with CAD, your health care provider may recommend that you take a daily dose (from 75 to 162 mg) of aspirin. A daily dose of 81 mg is recommended for people who have had PCI (angioplasty). It is most often prescribed along with another antiplatelet medicine. Aspirin can reduce the risk for heart attack and ischemic stroke. However, using aspirin over the long-term can raise your risk for stomach bleeding. Daily aspirin should not be used for prevention in healthy people who are at low risk for heart disease. You provider will consider your overall medical condition and risk factors for heart attack before recommending aspirin therapy.Taking aspirin helps prevent blood clots from forming in your arteries and may help lower your risk for a stroke or heart attack . Your provider may recommend to take daily aspirin if: You do not have a history of heart disease or stroke, but you are at high risk for a heart attack or stroke. You have been diagnosed with heart disease or stroke already. Aspirin helps get more blood flowing to your legs. It can treat a heart attack and prevent blood clots when you have an abnormal heartbeat. You probably will take aspirin after you have treatment for clogged arteries. You will most likely take aspirin as a pill. A daily low-dose aspirin (75 to 81 mg) is most often the first choice for preventing heart disease or stroke. Talk to your provider before taking aspirin every day. Your provider may change your dose from time to time.

An atrial myxoma is a noncancerous tumor in the upper left or right side of the heart. It most often grows on the wall that separates the two sides of the heart. This wall is called the atrial septum.A myxoma is a primary heart (cardiac) tumor. This means that the tumor started within the heart. Most heart tumors start somewhere else. Primary cardiac tumors such as myxomas are rare. About 75% of myxomas occur in the left atrium of the heart. They most often begin in the wall that divides the two upper chambers of the heart. They can occur in other intra-cardiac sites as well. Atrial myxomas are sometimes linked with valve obstruction stenosis and atrial fibrillation . Myxomas are more common in women. About 1 in 10 myxomas are passed down through families (inherited). These tumors are called familial myxomas. They tend to occur in more than one part of the heart at a time, and often cause symptoms at a younger age.

Getting regular exercise when you have heart disease is important. Physical activity can strengthen your heart muscle and help you manage blood pressure and cholesterol levels.Getting regular exercise when you have heart disease is important. Exercise can make your heart muscle stronger. It may also help you be more active without chest pain or other symptoms. Exercise may help lower your blood pressure and cholesterol. If you have diabetes, it can help you control your blood sugar. Regular exercise can help you lose weight. You will also feel better. Exercise will also help keep your bones strong. Always talk with your health care provider before starting an exercise program. You need to make sure the exercise you would like to do is safe for you. This is particularly important if: You recently had a heart attack. You have been having chest pain or pressure, or shortness of breath. You have diabetes. You recently had a heart procedure or heart surgery.



C-reactive protein (CRP) is produced by the liver. The level of CRP rises when there is inflammation throughout the body. It is one of a group of proteins, called acute phase reactants, that go up in response to inflammation. The levels of acute phase reactants increase in response to certain inflammatory proteins called cytokines. These proteins are produced by white blood cells during inflammation. This article discusses the blood test done to measure the amount of CRP in your blood.A blood sample is needed. This is most often taken from a vein. The procedure is called a venipuncture .

Cardiac amyloidosis is a disorder caused by deposits of an abnormal protein (amyloid) in the heart tissue. These deposits make it hard for the heart to work properly.Amyloidosis is a group of diseases in which clumps of proteins called amyloids build up in body tissues. Over time, these proteins replace normal tissue, leading to failure of the involved organ. There are many forms of amyloidosis. Cardiac amyloidosis ("stiff heart syndrome") occurs when amyloid deposits take the place of normal heart muscle. It is the most typical type of restrictive cardiomyopathy . Cardiac amyloidosis may affect the way electrical signals move through the heart (conduction system). This can lead to abnormal heartbeats ( arrhythmias ) and faulty heart signals (heart block). The condition can be inherited. This is called familial cardiac amyloidosis. It can also develop as the result of another disease such as a type of bone and blood cancer, or as the result of another medical problem causing inflammation. Cardiac amyloidosis is more common in men than in women. The disease is rare in people under age 40.



The creatine phosphokinase (CPK) isoenzymes test measures the different forms of CPK in the blood. CPK is an enzyme found mainly in the heart, brain, and skeletal muscle.A blood sample is needed. This may be taken from a vein. The test is called a venipuncture . If you are in the hospital, this test may be repeated over 2 or 3 days. A significant rise or fall in the total CPK or CPK isoenzymes can help your health care provider diagnose certain conditions.

The body's cardiovascular, or circulatory system, is made of the heart, blood, and blood vessels (arteries and veins). Heart and vascular services refers to the branch of medicine that focuses on the cardiovascular system. Watch this video about: HeartbeatThe heart's main job is to pump oxygen-rich blood to the body after it pumps oxygen-poor blood to the lungs. It normally does this 60 to 100 times a minute, 24 hours a day. The heart is made of four chambers: The right atrium receives oxygen-poor blood from the body. That blood then flows into the right ventricle, which pumps it to the lungs. The left atrium receives oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. From there, the blood flows into the left ventricle, which pumps blood out of the heart to the rest of the body. Together, the arteries and veins are referred to as the vascular system. In general, arteries carry blood away from the heart and veins carry blood back to the heart. The cardiovascular system delivers oxygen, nutrients, hormones, and other important substances to cells and organs in the body. It plays an important role in helping the body meet the demands of activity, exercise, and stress. It also helps maintain body temperature, among other things. CARDIOVASCULAR MEDICINE Cardiovascular medicine refers to the branch of health care that specializes in the treatment of diseases or conditions dealing with the heart and vascular systems. Common disorders include: Abdominal aortic aneurysm Congenital heart defects Coronary artery disease , including angina and heart attack Heart failure Heart valve problems High blood pressure and high cholesterol Irregular heart rhythms (arrhythmias) Peripheral artery disease (PAD) Stroke Physicians involved in the treatment of circulatory or vascular diseases include: Cardiologists -- Doctors who have received extra training in the treatment of heart and vascular disorders Vascular surgeons -- Doctors who have received extra training in blood vessel surgery Cardiac surgeons -- Doctors who have received extra training in heart-related surgery Primary care doctors Other health care providers who are involved in the treatment of circulatory or vascular diseases include: Nurse practitioners (NPs) or physician assistants (PAs), who focus on heart and vascular diseases Nutritionists or dietitians Nurses who receive special training in the management of patients with these disorders Imaging tests that may be done to diagnose, monitor or treat diseases of the circulatory and vascular system include: Cardiac CT Cardiac MRI Coronary angiography CT angiography (CTA) and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) Echocardiogram PET scan of the heart Stress tests (many different types of stress tests exist) Vascular ultrasound, such as carotid ultrasound Venous ultrasound of the arms and legs SURGERIES AND INTERVENTIONS Less invasive procedures may be done to diagnose, monitor or treat diseases of the heart and vascular system. In most of these types of procedures, a catheter is inserted through the skin into a large blood vessel. In most cases, such procedures do not need general anesthesia . Patients often do not need to stay in the hospital overnight. They recover in 1 to 3 days and can most often return to their normal activities within a week. Such procedures include: Ablation therapy to treat cardiac arrhythmias Angiogram (using x-rays and injected contrast dye to evaluate blood vessels) Angioplasty (using a small balloon to open a narrowing in a blood vessel) with or without stent placement Cardiac catheterization (measuring pressures in and around the heart) Heart surgery may be needed to treat certain heart or blood vessel problems. This may include: Heart transplant Insertion of pacemakers or defibrillators Open and minimally invasive coronary artery bypass surgery Repair or replacement of heart valves Surgical treatment of congenital heart defects Vascular surgery refers to surgical procedures that are used to treat or diagnose problems in a blood vessel, such as a blockage or rupture. Such procedures include: Arterial bypass grafts Endarterectomies Repair of aneurysms (dilated/enlarged portions) of the aorta and its branches Procedures may also be used to treat arteries that supply the brain, kidneys, intestines, arms and legs. CARDIOVASCULAR PREVENTION AND REHABILITATION Cardiac rehabilitation is therapy used to prevent heart disease from getting worse. It is usually recommended after major heart-related events such as a heart attack or cardiac surgery. It may include: Cardiovascular risk assessments Health screenings and wellness exams Nutrition and lifestyle counseling, including smoking cessation and diabetes education Supervised exercise

Coronary heart disease (CHD) is a narrowing of the small blood vessels that supply blood and oxygen to the heart. CHD is also called coronary artery disease. Risk factors are things that increase you chance of getting a disease or condition. This article discusses the risk factors for heart disease and things you can do to lessen your risk.A risk factor is something about you that increases your chance of getting a disease or having a certain health condition. Some risk factors for heart disease you cannot change, but some you can. Changing the risk factors that you have control over may help you live a longer, healthier life.

Heart disease and depression often go hand-in-hand. You are more likely to feel sad or depressed after a heart attack or heart surgery, or when symptoms of heart disease change your life. People who are depressed are more likely to develop heart disease. The good news is that treating depression may help improve both your mental and physical health.Heart disease and depression are linked in a number of ways. Some symptoms of depression, such as lack of energy, can make it harder to take care of your health. People who are depressed may be more likely to: Drink alcohol, overeat, or smoke to deal with feelings of depression Not exercise Feel stress, which increases the risk for abnormal heart rhythms and high blood pressure. Not take their medicines correctly All of these factors: Increase your risk of having a heart attack Increase your risk of dying after a heart attack Increases the risk of being readmitted to the hospital Slow down your recovery after a heart attack or heart surgery

If you have had angina, heart surgery, or a heart attack, you may: Wonder if and when you can have sex again Have different feelings about having sex or being intimate with your partner Almost everyone with heart problems has these questions and concerns. The most helpful thing you can do is talk to your health care providers, spouse, partner, or friends.Both you and your provider may be concerned that having sex will bring on a heart attack. Your provider can tell you when it is safe to have sex again. After a heart attack or heart procedure: You may have an exercise test, to see how your heart reacts to exercise. Sometimes, at least the first 2 weeks or so after a heart attack, your provider may advise avoiding sex. Make sure you know the symptoms that could mean your heart is working too hard. They include: Chest pain or pressure Feeling lightheaded, dizzy, or faint Nausea Trouble breathing Uneven or fast pulse If you have any of these symptoms during the day, avoid sex and talk to your provider. If you notice these symptoms during (or soon after) having sex, stop the activity. Call your provider to discuss your symptoms.

Palpitations are feelings or sensations that your heart is pounding or racing. They can be felt in your chest, throat, or neck. You may: Have an unpleasant awareness of your own heartbeat Feel like your heart skipped or stopped beats The heart's rhythm may be normal or abnormal when you have palpitations.Normally the heart beats 60 to 100 times per minute. The rate may drop below 60 beats per minute in people who exercise routinely or take medicines that slow the heart. If your heart rate is fast (over 100 beats per minute), this is called tachycardia. A heart rate slower than 60 is called bradycardia. An occasional extra heartbeat out of rhythm is known as extrasystole . Palpitations are not serious most of the time. Sensations representing an abnormal heart rhythm ( arrhythmia ) may be more serious. The following conditions make you more likely to have an abnormal heart rhythm: Known heart disease at the time the palpitations begin Significant risk factors for heart disease An abnormal heart valve An electrolyte abnormality in your blood -- for example, a low potassium level

Myocardial contusion is a bruise of the heart muscle.The most common causes are: Car crashes Getting hit by a car Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) Falling from a height, most often greater than 20 feet (6 meters)

The pulse is the number of heartbeats per minute.The pulse can be measured at areas where an artery passes close to the skin. These areas include the: Back of the knees Groin Neck Temple Top or inner side of the foot Wrist To measure the pulse at your wrist, place your index and middle finger over the underside of your opposite wrist, below the base of the thumb. Press with flat fingers until you feel the pulse. To measure the pulse on the neck, place the index and middle fingers just to the side of the Adam's apple, in the soft, hollow area. Press gently until you locate the pulse. Note: Sit or lie down before taking the neck pulse. The neck arteries in some people are sensitive to pressure. Fainting or slowing of the heartbeat can result. Also, do not take the pulses on both sides of the neck at the same time. Doing so can slow the flow of blood to the head and lead to fainting. Once you find the pulse, count the beats for 1 full minute. Or, count the beats for 30 seconds and multiply by 2. This will give the beats per minute.

A bounding pulse is a strong throbbing felt over one of the arteries in the body. It is due to a forceful heartbeat.A bounding pulse and rapid heart rate both occur in the following conditions or events: Abnormal or rapid heart rhythms Anemia Anxiety Long-term (chronic) kidney disease Fever Heart failure Heart valve problem called aortic regurgitation Heavy exercise Overactive thyroid (hyperthyroidism) Pregnancy, because of increased fluid and blood in the body

A heart-healthy diet is low in saturated fat . Saturated fat can increase your bad cholesterol and clog your arteries. A heart-healthy diet also limits foods with added salt, which can increase your blood pressure, and added sugar, which can lead to weight gain. Making heart-healthy food choices does not mean you have to sacrifice flavor. The key is to include more fresh produce, whole grains, beans, lean meats, fish, and low-fat dairy.Reduce the amount of fat in your dairy. Whole-fat dairy products are high in saturated fat. But there are healthier options. Instead of butter, cook with olive, canola, corn, or safflower oils. Replace heavy cream with evaporated skim milk. Replace whole-milk cheese, yogurt, and milk with low-fat versions. Experiment. If a recipe calls for whole milk, you can usually replace most or all of the volume with skim or low-fat milk with no reduction in final quality. Choose lean meats. They have less fat and are better for your heart. When selecting and cooking lean meats: Remove the skin from chicken and turkey before serving. Choose lean cuts of pork, such as tenderloin or loin chops. Look for beef cuts labeled "choice" or "select." Avoid marbled cuts of beef, or cuts marked "prime." Cut off visible fat before cooking. Instead of frying, bake, roast, broil, or stir fry meat. If excess fat pools in the pan, pour it off before serving the meat. Prepare meat as just a part of the meal, rather than the main attraction. For example, stir fry pork with broccoli and serve over brown rice. Along with the meat, you get a serving of vegetable and whole grain. You can also try meat substitutes with your meals. Beans are great in soups, salads, and over rice. Nuts liven up salads, stir-fried meals, and vegetables. Eggs make great dinners, as omelets and frittatas. Mushrooms add a meaty texture to sauces, casseroles, and stroganoffs. Tofu goes well with curries and stir fried dishes. Eat more fish, especially fish that are high in omega-3 fatty acids. This includes herring, sardines, salmon, tuna, trout, and mackerel.

Swan-Ganz catheterization (also called right heart catheterization or pulmonary artery catheterization) is the passing of a thin tube (catheter) into the right side of the heart and the arteries leading to the lungs. It is done to monitor the heart's function and blood flow and pressures in and around the heart.The test can be done while you are in bed in an intensive care unit (ICU) of a hospital. It can also be done in special procedure areas such as a cardiac catheterization laboratory. Before the test starts, you may be given medicine (sedative) to help you relax. You will lie on a padded table. Your doctor will make a puncture into a vein near the groin or in your arm, or neck. A flexible tube (catheter or sheath) is placed through the puncture. Sometimes, it will be placed in your leg or your arm. You will be awake during the procedure. A longer catheter is inserted. It is then carefully moved into the upper chamber of the right side of the heart. X-ray images may be used to help the health care provider see where the catheter should be placed. Blood may be removed from the catheter. This blood is tested to measure the amount of oxygen in the blood. During the procedure, your heart's rhythm will be constantly watched using an electrocardiogram (ECG).

Cardiovascular disease is the broad term for problems with the heart and blood vessels. These problems are often due to atherosclerosis . This condition occurs when fat and cholesterol build up in blood vessel (artery) walls. This buildup is called plaque. Over time, plaque can narrow blood vessels and cause problems throughout the body. If an artery becomes blocked, it can lead to heart attack or stroke.Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the most common type of heart disease, is when plaque builds up in the arteries leading to the heart. CHD is also called coronary artery disease (CAD). When arteries narrow, the heart cannot get enough blood and oxygen. A blocked artery can cause a heart attack . Over time, CHD can weaken the heart muscle and cause heart failure or arrhythmias. Heart failure occurs when the heart muscle becomes stiff or weak. It cannot pump out enough oxygen-rich blood, which causes symptoms throughout the body. The condition may affect only the right side or only the left side of the heart. More often, both sides of the heart are involved. High blood pressure and CAD are common causes of heart failure. Arrhythmias are problems with heart rate (pulse) or heart rhythm. This happens when the heart's electrical system doesn't work properly. The heart may beat too fast, too slow, or unevenly. Certain heart problems, such as heart attack or heart failure can cause problems with the heart's electrical system. Some people are born with an arrhythmia. Heart valve diseases occur when one of the four valves in the heart does not work properly. Blood can leak through the valve in the wrong direction (called regurgitation), or a valve may not open far enough and block blood flow (called stenosis). An unusual heartbeat, called a heart murmur , is the most common symptom. Certain heart problems, such as heart attack, heart disease, or infection, can cause heart valve diseases. Some people are born with heart valve problems. Peripheral artery disease occurs when the arteries to your legs and feet become narrow due to a buildup of plaque. Narrow arteries reduce or block blood flow. When blood and oxygen can't get to the legs, it can injure nerves and tissue. High blood pressure (hypertension) is a cardiovascular disease that can lead to other problems, such as heart attack, heart failure, and stroke. Stroke is caused by a lack of blood flow to the brain. This can happen because of a blood clot traveling to the blood vessels in the brain, or bleeding in the brain. Stoke has many of the same risk factors as heart disease. Congenital heart disease is a problem with the heart's structure and function that is present at birth. Congenital heart disease can describe a number of different problems affecting the heart. It is the most common type of birth defect.

Ventricular assist devices (VADs) help your heart pump blood from one of the main pumping chambers to the rest of your body or to the other side of the heart. These pumps are implanted in your body. In most cases they are connected to machinery outside your body.A ventricular assist device has 3 parts: A pump. The pump weighs 1 to 2 pounds (0.5 to 1 kilogram). It is placed inside or outside of your belly. An electronic controller. The controller is like a small computer that controls how the pump works. Batteries or another power source. The batteries are carried outside your body. They are connected to the pump with a cable that goes into your belly. If you are having an implanted VAD placed, you will need general anesthesia. This will make you sleep and be pain-free during the procedure. During surgery: The heart surgeon opens the middle of your chest with a surgical cut and then separates your breastbone. This allows access to your heart. Depending on the pump used, the surgeon will make space for the pump under your skin and tissue in the upper part of your belly wall. The surgeon will then place the pump in this space. A tube will connect the pump to your heart. Another tube will connect the pump to your aorta or one of your other major arteries. Another tube will be passed through your skin to connect the pump to the controller and batteries. The VAD will take blood from your ventricle (one of the main pumping chambers of the heart) through the tube that leads to the pump. Then the device will pump the blood back out to one of your arteries and through your body. Surgery most often lasts 4 to 6 hours. There are other types of VADs (called percutaneous ventricular assist devices) which can be placed with less invasive techniques to help the left or right ventricle. However, these typically cannot provide as much flow (support) as the surgically implanted ones.

VLDL stands for very low density lipoprotein. Lipoproteins are made up of cholesterol , triglycerides, and proteins. They move cholesterol, triglycerides, and other lipids (fats) around the body. VLDL is one of the three main types of lipoproteins. VLDL contains the highest amount of triglycerides. VLDL is a type of "bad cholesterol" because it helps cholesterol build up on the walls of arteries. A lab test is used to measure the amount of VLDL in your blood.A blood sample is needed. Most of the time blood is drawn from a vein located on the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.

Heart disease often develops over time. You may have early signs or symptoms long before you have serious heart problems. Or, you may not realize you are developing heart disease. The warning signs of heart disease may not be obvious. Also, not every person has the same symptoms. Certain symptoms, such as chest pain, ankle swelling, and shortness of breath may be signals that something is wrong. Learning the warning signs can help you get treatment and help prevent a heart attack or stroke .Chest pain is discomfort or pain that you feel along the front of your body, between your neck and upper abdomen. There are many causes of chest pain that have nothing to do with your heart. But chest pain is still the most common symptom of poor blood flow to the heart or a heart attack. This type of chest pain is called angina . Chest pain can occur when the heart is not getting enough blood or oxygen. The amount and type of pain can vary from person to person. The intensity of the pain does not always relate to how severe the problem is. Some people may feel a crushing pain, while others feel only mild discomfort. Your chest may feel heavy or like someone is squeezing your heart. You may also feel a sharp, burning pain in your chest. You may feel the pain under your breastbone (sternum), or in your neck, arms, stomach, jaw, or upper back. Chest pain from angina often occurs with activity or emotion, and goes away with rest or a medicine called nitroglycerin. Bad indigestion can also cause chest pain. Women, older adults, and people with diabetes may have little or no chest pain. Some people have symptoms other than chest pain, such as: Fatigue Shortness of breath General weakness Change in skin color or greyish pallor (episodes of change in skin color associated with weakness) Other symptoms of a heart attack can include: Extreme anxiety Fainting or loss of consciousness Lightheadedness or dizziness Nausea or vomiting Palpitations (feeling like your heart is beating too fast or irregularly) Shortness of breath Sweating, which may be very heavy

Angina is chest pain or discomfort you feel when there is not enough blood flow to your heart muscle. Your heart muscle needs the oxygen that the blood carries. Angina may feel like pressure or a squeezing pain in your chest. It may feel like indigestion. You may also feel pain in your shoulders, arms, neck, jaw, or back. Angina is a symptom of coronary artery disease (CAD), the most common heart disease . CAD happens when a sticky substance called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply blood to the heart, reducing blood flow. There are three types of angina: Stable angina is the most common type. It happens when the heart is working harder than usual. Stable angina has a regular pattern.  Rest and medicines usually help. Unstable angina is the most dangerous. It does not follow a pattern and can happen without physical exertion. It does not go away with rest or medicine. It is a sign that you could have a heart attack soon. Variant angina is rare. It happens when you are resting. Medicines can help. Not all chest pain or discomfort is angina.  If you have chest pain, you should see your health care provider. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

An arrhythmia is a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. When the heart beats faster than normal, it is called tachycardia. When the heart beats too slowly, it is called bradycardia. The most common type of arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation , which causes an irregular and fast heart beat. Many factors can affect your heart's rhythm, such as having had a heart attack , smoking, congenital heart defects , and stress. Some substances or medicines may also cause arrhythmias. Symptoms of arrhythmias include: Fast or slow heart beat Skipping beats Lightheadedness or dizziness Chest pain Shortness of breath Sweating Your doctor can run tests to find out if you have an arrhythmia. Treatment to restore a normal heart rhythm may include medicines, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or pacemaker , or sometimes surgery. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Cardiac rehabilitation (rehab) is a medically supervised program to help people who have: A heart attack Angioplasty or coronary artery bypass grafting for coronary heart disease A heart valve repair or replacement A heart transplant or a lung transplant Angina Heart failure The goal is to help you return to an active life, and to reduce the risk of further heart problems.  A team of specialists will create a plan for you that includes exercise training, education on heart healthy living, and counseling to reduce stress.  You will learn how to reduce your risk factors, such as high blood pressure, high blood cholesterol, depression, and diabetes. Being overweight, having obesity, smoking, and not exercising are other risk factors. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Cardiomyopathy is the name for diseases of the heart muscle. These diseases enlarge your heart muscle or make it thicker and more rigid than normal. In rare cases, scar tissue replaces the muscle tissue. Some people live long, healthy lives with cardiomyopathy. Some people don't even realize they have it. In others, however, it can make the heart less able to pump blood through the body. This can cause serious complications, including
: Heart failure Abnormal heart rhythms Heart valve problems Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) Heart attacks , high blood pressure , infections, and other diseases can all cause cardiomyopathy. Some types of cardiomyopathy run in families. In many people, however, the cause is unknown. Treatment might involve medicines, surgery, other medical procedures, and lifestyle changes. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute





What is diabetes? Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high. Glucose comes from foods you eat. The cells of your body need glucose for energy. A hormone called insulin helps the glucose get into your cells. With type 1 diabetes , your body doesn't make insulin. With type 2 diabetes , your body doesn't make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, glucose builds up in your blood and causes high blood sugar levels. What is diabetic heart disease? Diabetic heart disease is a term for heart disease in people who have diabetes. If you have diabetes, you are much more likely to develop heart disease or have a stroke than people who don't have diabetes. And you may start having these problems at a younger age. Over time, the effects of high blood sugar from diabetes can include damage to the blood vessels and nerves in your heart. This damage increases your chance of developing heart diseases, including: Coronary artery disease (CAD) . It happens slowly as a sticky material called plaque builds up in the arteries that supply your heart muscle with blood. Heart failure . With this condition, your heart can't pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet the needs of your body. Cardiomyopathy . This is a group of diseases in which the heart muscle may become thick or stiff. Who is more likely to develop diabetic heart disease? Diabetes puts you at serious risk for heart disease. It also makes you more likely to develop other conditions that raise your risk even more, including: High blood pressure High blood levels of LDL "bad" cholesterol High triglycerides (a type of fat in your blood) with low blood levels of HDL "good" cholesterol Your risk for heart disease is also higher if you Are male Smoke Have obesity Have too much belly fat around your waist, even though you're at a healthy weight: For men, that's a waist more than 40 inches For women, that's a waist more than 35 inches Have a family history of heart disease Have chronic kidney disease What are the symptoms of diabetic heart disease? In the early stages, heart disease usually doesn't have any symptoms. But if your heart disease worsens, you can have symptoms. Your symptoms will depend on the type of heart disease you have. They might include: Shortness of breath Fatigue Dizziness or fainting Arrhythmia (problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat) Swollen feet and ankles Chest pain It's important to know that people with diabetes may not feel chest pain. That's because diabetes can damage the nerves in your heart. If you have any symptoms that could be heart disease, talk with your health care provider. How is diabetic heart disease diagnosed? To find out if you have diabetic heart disease, your provider will: Ask about your medical history , including your symptoms and other health conditions you may have Ask about your family history , to find out if you have relatives who have or had heart disease Do a physical exam Likely run some tests to help understand your personal risk for heart disease , including: Blood tests to check your cholesterol , triglycerides , and blood sugar levels A blood-pressure check Heart tests , if needed Depending on your risk level, your provider may send you to a cardiologist (a doctor who specializes in heart diseases) for care. If you do have heart disease, treatment will depend on the type of heart disease you have. How can I prevent diabetic heart disease? You may be able to prevent heart disease or keep it from getting worse by working with your provider to: Control your blood sugar levels Manage other conditions you may have that can raise your risk for heart disease Take any medicines your provider prescribed Make heart-healthy habits part of your daily life Follow a healthy eating plan for diabetes NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Endocarditis, also called infective endocarditis (IE), is an inflammation of the inner lining of the heart. The most common type, bacterial endocarditis, occurs when germs enter your heart. These germs come through your bloodstream from another part of your body, often your mouth. Bacterial endocarditis can damage your heart valves. If untreated, it can be life-threatening. It is rare in healthy hearts. Risk factors include having: An abnormal or damaged heart valve An artificial heart valve Congenital heart defects The signs and symptoms of IE can vary from person to person. They also can vary over time in the same person. Symptoms you might notice include fever, shortness of breath, fluid buildup in your arms or legs, tiny red spots on your skin, and weight loss. Your doctor will diagnose IE based on your risk factors, medical history, signs and symptoms, and lab and heart tests. Early treatment can help you avoid complications. Treatment usually involves high-dose antibiotics. If your heart valve is damaged, you may need surgery. If you're at risk for IE, brush and floss your teeth regularly, and have regular dental checkups. Germs from a gum infection can enter your bloodstream.  If you are at high risk, your doctor might prescribe antibiotics before dental work and certain types of surgery. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute





Heart diseases are the number one killer in the U.S. They are also a major cause of disability. If you do have a heart disease, it is important to find it early, when it is easier to treat. Blood tests and heart health tests can help find heart diseases or identify problems that can lead to heart diseases. There are several different types of heart health tests. Your doctor will decide which test or tests you need, based on your symptoms (if any), risk factors, and medical history. Cardiac Catheterization Cardiac catheterization is a medical procedure used to diagnose and treat some heart conditions. For the procedure, your doctor puts a catheter (a long, thin, flexible tube) into a blood vessel in your arm, groin, or neck, and threads it to your heart. The doctor can use the catheter to: Do a coronary angiography. This involves putting a special type of dye in the catheter, so the dye can flow through your bloodstream to your heart. Then your doctor takes x-rays of your heart. The dye allows your doctor to see your coronary arteries on the x-ray, and to check for coronary artery disease (plaque buildup in the arteries). Take samples of blood and heart muscle Do procedures such as minor heart surgery or angioplasty , if your doctor finds that you need it Cardiac CT Scan A cardiac CT ( computed tomography ) scan is a painless imaging test that uses x-rays to take detailed pictures of your heart and its blood vessels. Computers can combine these pictures to create a three-dimensional (3D) model of the whole heart. This test can help doctors detect or evaluate: Coronary artery disease Calcium buildup in the coronary arteries Problems with the aorta Problems with heart function and valves Pericardial diseases Before you have the test, you get an injection of contrast dye. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the pictures. The CT scanner is a large, tunnel-like machine. You lie still on a table which slides you into the scanner, and the scanner takes the pictures for about 15 minutes. Cardiac MRI Cardiac MRI ( magnetic resonance imaging ) is a painless imaging test that uses radio waves, magnets, and a computer to create detailed pictures of your heart. It can help your doctor figure out whether you have heart disease, and if so, how severe it is. A cardiac MRI can also help your doctor decide the best way to treat heart problems such as: Coronary artery disease Heart valve problems Pericarditis Cardiac tumors Damage from a heart attack The MRI is a large, tunnel-like machine. You lie still on a table which slides you into the MRI machine. The machine makes loud noises as it takes pictures of your heart. It usually takes about 30-90 minutes. Sometimes before the test, you might get an injection of contrast dye. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the pictures. Chest X-Ray A chest x-ray creates pictures of the organs and structures inside your chest, such as your heart, lungs, and blood vessels. It can reveal signs of heart failure , as well as lung disorders and other causes of symptoms not related to heart disease. Coronary Angiography Coronary angiography (angiogram) is a procedure that uses contrast dye and x-ray pictures to look at the insides of your arteries. It can show whether plaque is blocking your arteries and how severe the blockage is. Doctors use this procedure to diagnose heart diseases after chest pain , sudden cardiac arrest (SCA), or abnormal results from other heart tests such as an EKG or a stress test. You usually have a cardiac catheterization to get the dye into your coronary arteries. Then you have special x-rays while the dye is flowing through your coronary arteries. The dye lets your doctor study the flow of blood through your heart and blood vessels. Echocardiography Echocardiography, or echo, is a painless test that uses sound waves to create moving pictures of your heart. The pictures show the size and shape of your heart. They also show how well your heart's chambers and valves are working. Doctors use an echo to diagnose many different heart problems, and to check how severe they are. For the test, a technician applies gel to your chest. The gel helps sound waves reach your heart. The technician moves a transducer (wand-like device) around on your chest. The transducer connects to a computer. It transmits ultrasound waves into your chest, and the waves bounce (echo) back. The computer converts the echoes into pictures of your heart. Electrocardiogram (EKG), (ECG) An electrocardiogram, also called an ECG or EKG, is a painless test that detects and records your heart's electrical activity. It shows how fast your heart is beating and whether its rhythm is steady or irregular. An EKG may be part of a routine exam to screen for heart disease. Or you may get it to detect and study heart problems such as heart attacks, arrhythmia , and heart failure. For the test, you lie still on a table and a nurse or technician attaches electrodes (patches that have sensors) to the skin on your chest, arms, and legs. Wires connect the electrodes to a machine that records your heart's electrical activity. Stress Testing Stress testing looks at how your heart works during physical stress. It can help to diagnose coronary artery disease, and to check how severe it is. It can also check for other problems, including heart valve disease and heart failure. For the test, you exercise (or are given medicine if you are unable to exercise) to make your heart work hard and beat fast. While this is happening, you get an EKG and blood pressure monitoring. Sometimes you may also have an echocardiogram, or other imaging tests such as a nuclear scan . For the nuclear scan, you get an injection of a tracer (a radioactive substance), which travels to your heart. Special cameras detect the energy from the tracer to make pictures of your heart. You have pictures taken after you exercise, and then after you rest. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is heart surgery? Heart surgery can correct certain heart problems when other treatments haven't worked or can't be used. In some cases, heart surgery may be a medical emergency. For example, surgery for a severe heart attack may need to be done right away. In other cases, you can plan heart surgery ahead of time. Some heart surgeries are major operations, such as heart bypass surgery for blocked arteries in the heart. Other surgeries are more minor heart procedures, such as putting in a pacemaker. What conditions does heart surgery treat? There are different types of heart surgery that can help treat many heart conditions: What conditions does heart surgery treat? What does the heart surgery do? Coronary artery disease (CAD) - when a sticky substance called plaque narrows or blocks the arteries that supply blood to your heart muscle. Makes a new path for blood to flow around the blocked part of an artery in the heart. This is called a coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) , or heart bypass. It's the most common heart surgery in adults. Heart valve diseases - problems with the valves that control the flow of blood through your heart. Repairs heart valves. Replaces heart valves with a mechanical valve or a biologic valve made from pig, cow, or human heart tissue. Arrhythmia - problems with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. They are caused by changes in the electrical signals that control your heartbeat. Places a pacemaker or an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) in the chest to correct your heartbeat. Treats atrial fibrillation with small cuts in the heart muscle. The cuts form scars that make a path for the heart's electrical signals (Maze surgery). Heart failure - when your heart is too weak or stiff to pump enough oxygen-rich blood to meet your body's needs. Places a device in the chest which may include: An implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) to help prevent sudden cardiac arrest . A biventricular pacemaker to coordinate the heart's pumping action so it's more powerful. A ventricular assist device to help the heart pump blood. A total artificial heart to pump blood for the heart. Replaces a seriously diseased heart with a heathy heart ( heart transplantation ). Heart aneurysm - a balloon-like bulge in the wall of an artery. It can be life-threatening if the aneurysm tears or bursts. Repairs or replaces the weak part of a heart artery using a patch or a tube made of fabric. Angina - chest pain from coronary artery disease. Uses a laser to make small channels through part of the heart muscle (transmyocardial laser revascularization). Damaged and abnormal heart structures, including congenital heart defects - heart structure problems that you're born with. Repairs heart damage or problems with how the heart and blood vessels are formed. Repairs depend on the type of defect or damage. What approaches do surgeons use to do heart surgery? The approach a surgeon uses to do heart surgery depends on your heart problem, your general health, and other factors. Approaches to heart surgery include: Open-heart surgery (also called traditional heart surgery) is when the surgeon cuts the chest open to reach the heart. Because it's difficult to operate on a beating heart, medicines are used to stop the heart. A heart-lung bypass machine keeps oxygen-rich blood pumping through the body during the surgery. Off-pump heart surgery is open-heart surgery on a beating heart without using a heart-lung bypass machine. The surgeon holds the heart steady with a device. Surgeons may use off-pump heart surgery to do coronary artery bypass grafts (CABG), but only in certain cases. Minimally invasive heart surgery uses small cuts between the ribs. The cuts may be as small as 2 to 3 inches. The surgeon inserts tools into the chest through the cuts. This type of heart surgery may or may not use a heart-lung bypass machine. Robotic-assisted surgery is a type of minimally invasive surgery. The surgeon uses a computer to control tools on the arms of a robot. This allows the surgeon to be very accurate when doing difficult operations. What are the risks of heart surgery? Like all surgery, heart surgery has risks even though the results are often excellent. The risks include: Bleeding Infection, fever , and swelling A problem from anesthesia (medicine that makes you sleep during surgery) Arrhythmia Damage to the heart, kidneys, liver, and lungs Stroke The risks of heart surgery tend to be higher if: The surgery is an emergency. You have other medical conditions, including: Diabetes Kidney diseases Lung diseases Peripheral artery disease (PAD) NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute



Heart disease is the leading cause of the death in the United States. It is also a major cause of disability. There are many things that can raise your risk for heart disease. They are called risk factors. Some of them you cannot control, but there are many that you can control. Learning about them can lower your risk of heart disease. What are the heart disease risk factors that I cannot change? Age. Your risk of heart disease increases as you get older. Men age 45 and older and women age 55 and older have a greater risk. Sex. Some risk factors may affect heart disease risk differently in women than in men. For example, estrogen provides women some protection against heart disease, but diabetes raises the risk of heart disease more in women than in men. Race or ethnicity. Certain groups have higher risks than others. African Americans are more likely than whites to have heart disease, while Hispanic Americans are less likely to have it. Some Asian groups, such as East Asians, have lower rates, but South Asians have higher rates. Family history. You have a greater risk if you have a close family member who had heart disease at an early age. What can I do to lower my risk of heart disease? Fortunately, there are many things you can do to reduce your chances of getting heart disease: Control your blood pressure. High blood pressure is a major risk factor for heart disease. It is important to get your blood pressure checked regularly - at least once a year for most adults, and more often if you have high blood pressure. Take steps, including lifestyle changes, to prevent or control high blood pressure. Keep your cholesterol and triglyceride levels under control. High levels of cholesterol can clog your arteries and raise your risk of coronary artery disease and heart attack. Lifestyle changes and medicines (if needed) can lower your cholesterol. Triglycerides are another type of fat in the blood. High  levels of triglycerides may also raise the risk of coronary artery disease, especially in women. Stay at a healthy weight. Being overweight or having obesity can increase your risk for heart disease. This is mostly because they are linked to other heart disease risk factors, including high blood cholesterol and triglyceride levels, high blood pressure, and diabetes. Controlling your weight can lower these risks. Eat a healthy diet. Try to limit saturated fats, foods high in sodium, and added sugars. Eat plenty of fresh fruit, vegetables, and whole grains. The DASH diet is an example of an eating plan that can help you to lower your blood pressure and cholesterol, two things that can lower your risk of heart disease. Get regular exercise. Exercise has many benefits, including strengthening your heart and improving your circulation. It can also help you maintain a healthy weight and lower cholesterol and blood pressure. All of these can lower your risk of heart disease. Limit alcohol. Drinking too much alcohol can raise your blood pressure. It also adds extra calories, which may cause weight gain. Both of those raise your risk of heart disease. Men should have no more than two alcoholic drinks per day, and women should not have more than one. Don't smoke. Cigarette smoking raises your blood pressure and puts you at higher risk for heart attack and stroke. If you do not smoke, do not start. If you do smoke, quitting will lower your risk for heart disease. You can talk with your health care provider for help in finding the best way for you to quit. Manage stress. Stress is linked to heart disease in many ways. It can raise your blood pressure. Extreme stress can be a "trigger" for a heart attack. Also, some common ways of coping with stress, such as overeating, heavy drinking, and smoking, are bad for your heart. Some ways to help manage your stress include exercise, listening to music, focusing on something calm or peaceful, and meditating. Manage diabetes. Having diabetes doubles your risk of diabetic heart disease . That is because over time, high blood sugar from diabetes can damage your blood vessels and the nerves that control your heart and blood vessels. So, it is important to get tested for diabetes, and if you have it, to keep it under control. Make sure that you get enough sleep. If you don't get enough sleep, you raise your risk of high blood pressure, obesity, and diabetes. Those three things can raise your risk for heart disease. Most adults need 7 to 9 hours of sleep per night. Make sure that you have good sleep habits . If you have frequent sleep problems, contact your health care provider. One problem, sleep apnea , causes people to briefly stop breathing many times during sleep. This interferes with your ability to get a good rest and can raise your risk of heart disease. If you think you might have it, ask your doctor about having a sleep study. And if you do have sleep apnea, make sure that you get treatment for it.

The pericardium is a membrane, or sac, that surrounds your heart. It holds the heart in place and helps it work properly.  Problems with the pericardium include: Pericarditis - an inflammation of the sac. It can be from a virus or other infection, a heart attack, heart surgery, other medical conditions, injuries, and certain medicines. Pericardial effusion - the  buildup of fluid in the sac Cardiac tamponade - a serious problem in which buildup of fluid in the sac causes problems with the function of the heart Symptoms of pericardial problems include chest pain, rapid heartbeat, and difficulty breathing. Fever is a common symptom of acute pericarditis. Your doctor may use a physical exam, imaging tests, and heart tests to make a diagnosis. Treatment depends on the cause. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) is a condition in which the heart suddenly stops beating. When that happens, blood stops flowing to the brain and other vital organs. If it is not treated, SCA usually causes death within minutes. But quick treatment with a defibrillator may be lifesaving. How is sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) different from a heart attack? A heart attack is different from an SCA. A heart attack happens when blood flow to the heart is blocked. During a heart attack, the heart usually doesn't suddenly stop beating. With an SCA, the heart stops beating. Sometimes an SCA can happen after or during recovery from a heart attack. What causes sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? Your heart has an electrical system that controls the rate and rhythm of your heartbeat.  An SCA can happen when the heart's electrical system is not working right and causes irregular heartbeats. Irregular heartbeats are called arrhythmias . There are different types. They may cause the heart to beat too fast, too slow, or with an irregular rhythm. Some can cause the heart to stop pumping blood to the body; this is the type that causes SCA. Certain diseases and conditions can cause the electrical problems that lead to SCA. They include: Ventricular fibrillation , a type of arrhythmia where the ventricles (the heart's lower chambers) don't beat normally. Instead, they beat very fast and very irregularly. They can't pump blood to the body. This causes most SCAs. Coronary artery disease (CAD) , also called ischemic heart disease. CAD happens when the arteries of the heart cannot deliver enough oxygen-rich blood to the heart. It is often caused by the buildup of plaque , a waxy substance, inside the lining of larger coronary arteries. The plaque blocks some or all of the blood flow to the heart. Some types of physical stress can cause your heart's electrical system to fail, such as Intense physical activity in which your body releases the hormone adrenaline. This hormone can trigger SCA in people who have heart problems. Very low blood levels of potassium or magnesium. These minerals play an important role in your heart's electrical system. Major blood loss Severe lack of oxygen Certain inherited disorders which can cause arrhythmias or problems with the structure of your heart Structural changes in the heart , such as an enlarged heart due to high blood pressure or advanced heart disease. Heart infections can also cause changes to the structure of the heart. Who is at risk for sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? You are at higher risk for SCA if you: Have coronary artery disease (CAD). Most people with SCA have CAD. But CAD usually doesn't cause symptoms, so they may not know that they have it. Are older; your risk increases with age Are a man; it is more common in men than women Are Black or African American, especially if you have other conditions such as diabetes , high blood pressure, heart failure , or chronic kidney disease Have a personal history of heartbeats that aren't regular (arrhythmia) Have a personal or family history of SCA or inherited disorders that can cause arrhythmia Have a problem with drug or alcohol use Have had a heart attack Have heart failure What are the symptoms of sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? Usually, the first sign of SCA is loss of consciousness ( fainting ). This happens when the heart stops beating. Some people may have a racing heartbeat or feel dizzy or light-headed just before they faint. And sometimes people have chest pain , shortness of breath , nausea, or vomiting in the hour before they have an SCA. How is sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) diagnosed? SCA happens without warning and requires emergency treatment. Health care providers rarely diagnose SCA with medical tests as it's happening. Instead, it is usually diagnosed after it happens. Providers do this by ruling out other causes of a person's sudden collapse. If you are at high risk for SCA, your provider may refer you to a cardiologist, a doctor who specializes in heart diseases. The cardiologist may ask you to get various heart health tests to see how well you heart is working. He or she will work with you to decide whether you need treatment to prevent SCA. What are the treatments for sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? SCA is an emergency. A person having SCA needs to be treated with a defibrillator right away. A defibrillator is a device sends an electric shock to the heart. The electric shock can restore a normal rhythm to a heart that's stopped beating. To work well, it needs to be done within minutes of the SCA. Most police officers, emergency medical technicians, and other first responders are trained and equipped to use a defibrillator. Call 9-1-1 right away if someone has signs or symptoms of SCA. The sooner you call for help, the sooner lifesaving treatment can begin. What should I do if I think that someone has had an SCA? Many public places such as schools, businesses, and airports have automated external defibrillators (AEDs). AEDs are special defibrillators that untrained people can use if they think that someone has had SCA. AEDS are programmed to give an electric shock if they detect a dangerous arrhythmia. This prevents giving a shock to someone who may have fainted but isn't having SCA. If you see someone who you think has had SCA, you should give cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) until defibrillation can be done. People who are at risk for SCA may want to consider having an AED at home. Ask your cardiologist to help you decide whether having an AED in your home might help you. What are the treatments after surviving sudden cardiac arrest (SCA)? If you survive SCA, you'll likely be admitted to a hospital for ongoing care and treatment. In the hospital, your medical team will closely watch your heart. They may give you medicines to try to reduce the risk of another SCA. They will also try to find out what caused your SCA. If you're diagnosed with coronary artery disease, you may have an angioplasty or coronary artery bypass surgery . These procedures help restore blood flow through narrowed or blocked coronary arteries. Often, people who have had SCA get a device called an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) . This small device is surgically placed under the skin in your chest or abdomen. An ICD uses electric pulses or shocks to help control dangerous arrhythmias. Can sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) be prevented? You may be able to lower your risk of SCA by following a heart-healthy lifestyle . If you have coronary artery disease or another heart disease, treating that disease can also lower your risk of SCA. If you have had an SCA, getting an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) can lower your chance of having another SCA. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute











Alcohol use involves drinking beer, wine, or hard liquor.Alcohol is one of the most widely used drug substances in the world. TEEN DRINKING Alcohol use is not only an adult problem. Most American high school seniors have had an alcoholic drink within the past month. This is in spite of the fact that the legal drinking age is 21 years old in the United States. About 1 in 5 teens are considered "problem drinkers." This means that they: Get drunk Have accidents related to alcohol use Get into trouble with the law, family members, friends, school, or dates because of alcohol THE EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL Alcoholic drinks have different amounts of alcohol in them. Beer is about 5% alcohol, although some beers have more. Wine is usually 12% to 15% alcohol. Hard liquor is about 45% alcohol. Alcohol gets into your bloodstream quickly. The amount and type of food in your stomach can change how quickly this occurs. For example, high-carbohydrate and high-fat foods can make your body absorb alcohol more slowly. Certain types of alcoholic drinks get into your bloodstream faster. Stronger drinks tend to be absorbed faster. Alcohol slows your breathing rate, heart rate, and how well your brain functions. These effects may appear within 10 minutes and peak at around 40 to 60 minutes. Alcohol stays in your bloodstream until it is broken down by the liver. The amount of alcohol in your blood is called your blood alcohol level. If you drink alcohol faster than the liver can break it down, this level rises. Your blood alcohol level is used to legally define whether or not you are drunk. The legal limit for blood alcohol usually falls between 0.08 and 0.10 in most states. Below is a list of blood alcohol levels and the likely symptoms: 0.05 -- reduced inhibitions 0.10 -- slurred speech 0.20 -- euphoria and motor impairment 0.30 -- confusion 0.40 -- stupor 0.50 -- coma 0.60 -- breathing stops and death You can have symptoms of being drunk at blood alcohol levels below the legal definition of being drunk. Also, people who drink alcohol frequently may not have symptoms until a higher blood alcohol level is reached. HEALTH RISKS OF ALCOHOL Alcohol increases the risk of: Alcoholism Falls, drownings, and other accidents Head, neck, stomach, colon, breast, and other cancers Heart attack and stroke Motor vehicle accidents Risky sex behaviors, unplanned or unwanted pregnancy, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Suicide and homicide Drinking during pregnancy can harm the developing baby. Severe birth defects or fetal alcohol syndrome are possible. RESPONSIBLE DRINKING If you drink alcohol, it is best to do so in moderation. Moderation means the drinking is not getting you intoxicated (or drunk) and you are drinking no more than 1 drink per day if you are a woman and no more than 2 if you are a man. A drink is defined as 12 ounces (350 milliliters) of beer, 5 ounces (150 milliliters) of wine, or 1.5 ounces (45 milliliters) of liquor. Here are some ways to drink responsibly, provided you do not have a drinking problem, are of legal age to drink alcohol, and are not pregnant: Never drink alcohol and drive a car. If you are going to drink, have a designated driver, or plan an alternative way home, such as a taxi or bus. DO NOT drink on an empty stomach. Snack before and while drinking alcohol. If you are taking medicines, including over-the-counter drugs, check with your health care provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make the effects of many medicines stronger. It can also interact with other medicines, making them ineffective or dangerous or make you sick. If alcohol use runs in your family, you may be at increased risk of developing this disease yourself. So, you may want to avoid drinking alcohol altogether . CALL YOUR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER IF: You are concerned about your personal alcohol use or that of a family member You are interested in more information regarding alcohol use or support groups You are unable to reduce or stop your alcohol consumption, in spite of attempts to stop drinking Other resources include: Local Alcoholics Anonymous or Al-anon/Alateen groups Local hospitals Public or private mental health agencies School or work counselors Student or employee health centers

Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is growth, mental, and physical problems that may occur in a baby when a mother drinks alcohol during pregnancy.Using alcohol during pregnancy can cause the same risks as using alcohol in general. But it poses extra risks to the unborn baby. When a pregnant woman drinks alcohol, it easily passes across the placenta to the fetus. Because of this, drinking alcohol can harm the unborn baby. There is no "safe" level of alcohol use during pregnancy. Larger amounts of alcohol appear to increase the problems. Binge drinking is more harmful than drinking small amounts of alcohol. Timing of alcohol use during pregnancy is also important. Drinking alcohol is likely most harmful during the first 3 months of pregnancy. But drinking alcohol any time during pregnancy can be harmful.

A breath alcohol test determines how much alcohol is in your blood. The test measures the amount of alcohol in the air you breathe out (exhale).There are many brands of breath alcohol tests. Each one uses a different method to test the level of alcohol in the breath. The machine may be electronic or manual. One common tester is the balloon type. You blow up the balloon with one breath until it is full. You then release the air into a glass tube. The tube is filled with bands of yellow crystals. The bands in the tube change colors (from yellow to green), depending on the alcohol content. Carefully read the instructions before using the test to make sure you get an accurate result. If an electronic alcohol meter is used, follow the instructions that come with the meter.

Alcoholic drinks, like many other drinks, contain calories that can add up quickly. Going out for a couple of drinks can add 500 calories, or more, to your daily intake. Most alcoholic drinks have little to no nutritional value. If you are trying to lose weight or maintain a healthy weight, you will want to watch how much you drink. Cocktails mixed with soda, juice, cream, or ice cream can have especially high calorie counts. If you find you are having trouble cutting back on alcohol , talk with your health care provider. Here is a list of some popular alcoholic beverages, their serving sizes, and the number of calories in each. Calorie count - alcoholic beverages BEVERAGE SERVING SIZE CALORIES Beer Beer (light) 12 oz (355 ml) 103 Beer (regular) 12 oz (355 ml) 153 Beer (higher alcohol, craft beers) 12 oz (355 ml) 170 to 350 Distilled Alcohol Gin (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Gin (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Rum (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Rum (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Vodka (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Vodka (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Whiskey (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Whiskey (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Liqueurs Coffee liqueur 1.5 oz (45 ml) 160 Coffee liqueur with cream 1.5 oz (45 ml) 154 Crème de menthe 1.5 oz (45 ml) 186 Mixed Drinks Bloody Mary 4.6 oz (136 ml) 120 Chocolate martini 2.5 oz (74 ml) 418 Cosmopolitan 2.75 oz (81 ml) 146 Daiquiri 2.7 oz (80 ml) 137 Highball 8 oz (235 ml) 110 Hot buttered rum 8 oz (235 ml) 292 Mai Tai 4.9 oz (145 ml) 306 Margarita 4 oz (120 ml) 168 Mimosa 4 oz (120 ml) 75 Mint Julep 4.5 oz (135 ml) 165 Mojito 6 oz (177 ml) 143 Pina colada 6.8 oz (200 ml) 526 Rum and Coke 8 oz (235 ml) 185 Rum and Diet Coke 8 oz (235 ml) 100 Tequila sunrise 6.8 oz (200 ml) 232 Vodka and tonic 7 oz (207 ml) 189 Whiskey sour 3 oz (89 ml) 125 White Russian 8 oz (235 ml) 568 Wine White table wine 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Gewurztraminer 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Muscat 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Riesling 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Chenin Blanc 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Chardonnay 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Sauvignon Blanc 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Fume Blanc 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Pinot Grigio 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Dry dessert wine 3.5 oz (90 ml) 157 Red table wine 5 oz (145 ml) 125 Petite Sirah 5 oz (145 ml) 125 Merlot 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Cabernet Sauvignon 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Red Zinfandel 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Burgundy 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Pinot Noir 5 oz (145 ml) 121 Claret 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Syrah 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Red dessert wine 3.5 oz (90 ml) 165Weight loss - calorie count - alcoholic beverages; Overweight - calorie count - alcoholic beverages; Obesity - calorie count - alcoholic beverages



If you are overweight or have obesity , losing weight can improve your health. It might also help you prevent weight-related diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes, arthritis and some cancers.  A healthy diet is an important part of a weight-loss program. It: May include fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat milk and milk products May include lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, eggs and nuts Goes easy on saturated fats, trans fat, cholesterol, salt (sodium), and added sugars The key to losing weight is to burn more calories than you eat and drink. A diet can help you to do this through portion control.  There are many different types of diets. Some, like the Mediterranean diet, describe a traditional way of eating from a specific region. Others, like the DASH eating plan or a diet to lower cholesterol , were designed for people who have certain health problems. But they may also help you to lose weight. There are also fad or crash diets that severely restrict calories or the types of food you are allowed to eat. They may sound promising, but they rarely lead to permanent weight loss. They also may not provide all of the nutrients your body needs. In addition to a diet, adding exercise into your daily life can help you to lose weight. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases



Ethanol poisoning is caused by drinking too much alcohol. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Ethanol



If you drink alcohol, health care providers advise limiting how much you drink. This is called drinking in moderation, or responsible drinking.Responsible drinking means more than just limiting yourself to a certain number of drinks. It also means not getting drunk and not letting alcohol control your life or your relationships.



If you are trying to lose weight, you can boost your efforts by cutting back on alcoholic drinks. Alcohol can cause weight gain in a couple of ways. First, alcohol is high in calories. Some mixed drinks can contain as many calories as a meal, but without the nutrients. Second, you also may make poor food choices when you drink. While you do not have to cut out all alcohol if you are trying to lose weight, you may need to make some changes. You should watch the number, and type, of drinks you choose. You will also want to keep an eye on how drinking affects your eating habits.So, how much can you drink if you are trying to lose weight? Health experts recommend that anyone who drinks should do so in moderation . This means no more than 1 drink per day for women and no more than 2 drinks per day for men. You may want to drink even less than that while dieting. Keep in mind that alcohol has empty calories. This means it has a lot of calories (7 per gram versus 4 per gram for carbohydrate and protein) but few nutrients. So in order to drink alcohol while cutting back on calories, you need to plan it into your daily calorie count so you do not go over. Also remember that when you drink alcohol, you are replacing potentially healthy, and filling, food with calories that will not fill you up. When choosing what to drink, you will want to choose your calories wisely. Here is a quick comparison of some common alcoholic drinks: Regular beer, about 150 calories for a 12-ounce (355 mL) glass Light beer, about 100 calories for a 12-ounce (355 mL) glass Wine, about 100 calories for a 5-ounce (145 mL) glass Distilled alcohol (gin, rum, vodka, whiskey), about 100 calories for a 1.5-ounce (45 mL) serving Martini (extra dry), about 140 calories for a 2.25-ounce (65 mL) glass Pina colada, about 500 calories in a 7-ounce (205 mL) glass Pay attention to what else goes in your drink. Many mixed drinks include juices, simple syrup, or liqueur, which all add extra calories. These calories can add up quickly. Look for lower calorie options, such as a splash of juice and soda water. You may want to skip mixed drinks completely and stick with beer or wine. Portion size is something else you should keep an eye on. Know what a standard drink looks like: 12 ounces (355 mL) of beer 5 ounces (145 mL) of wine 1.5 ounces (45 mL, or one shot) of hard liquor The sizes of alcoholic drinks at a restaurant or bar are often larger than the standard amounts listed above. In some cases, 1 drink may actually have 2 or more servings of alcohol and calories. If you are served a drink that is larger than the standard size, skip a second drink. At home, use a jigger when mixing drinks, and serve them in smaller glasses. It will feel like you are having more.



Keeping a healthy weight is crucial.  If you are underweight or overweight, or have obesity , you may have a higher risk of certain health problems. About two thirds of adults in the U.S. are overweight or have obesity. Achieving a healthy weight can help you control your cholesterol, blood pressure and blood sugar. It might also help you prevent weight-related diseases, such as heart disease, diabetes, arthritis and some cancers. Eating too much or not being physically active enough will make you overweight. To maintain your weight, the calories you eat must equal the energy you burn. To lose weight, you must use more calories than you eat. A weight-control strategy might include: Choosing low-fat, low-calorie foods Eating smaller portions Drinking water instead of sugary drinks Being physically active Eating extra calories within a well-balanced diet can help to add weight. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Many people with alcohol problems cannot tell when their drinking is out of control. It is important to be aware of how much you are drinking. You should also know how your alcohol use may affect your life and those around you. One drink equals one 12-ounce (oz), or 355 milliliters (mL), can or bottle of beer, one 5-ounce (148 mL) glass of wine, 1 wine cooler, 1 cocktail, or 1 shot of hard liquor. Think about: How often you have an alcoholic drink How many drinks you have when you do drink How any drinking you are doing affects your life or the lives of othersHere are some guidelines for drinking alcohol responsibly, as long as you do not have a drinking problem. Healthy men up to age 65 should limit themselves to: No more than 4 drinks in 1 day No more than 14 drinks in a week Healthy women up to age 65 should limit themselves to: No more than 3 drinks in 1 day No more than 7 drinks in a week Healthy women of all ages and healthy men over age 65 should limit themselves to: No more than 3 drinks in 1 day No more than 7 drinks in a week





Studies have shown that adults who drink light to moderate amounts of alcohol may be less likely to develop heart disease than those who do not drink at all or are heavy drinkers. However, people who do not drink alcohol should not start just because they want to avoid developing heart disease.There is a fine line between healthy drinking and risky drinking . Do not begin drinking or drink more often just to lower your risk of heart disease. Heavier drinking can harm the heart and liver. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in people who abuse alcohol. Health care providers recommend that if you drink alcohol, drink only light to moderate amounts: For men, limit alcohol to 1 to 2 drinks a day. For women, limit alcohol to 1 drink a day. One drink is defined as: 4 ounces (118 milliliters, mL) of wine 12 ounces (355 mL) of beer 1 1/2 ounces (44 mL) of 80-proof spirits 1 ounce (30 mL) of 100-proof spirits Though research has found that alcohol may help prevent heart disease, much more effective ways to prevent heart disease include: Controlling blood pressure and cholesterol Exercising and following a low-fat, healthy diet Not smoking Maintaining an ideal weight Anyone who has heart disease or heart failure should talk to their provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make heart failure and other heart problems worse.

A healthy diet is a major factor in reducing your risk for heart disease.A healthy diet and lifestyle can reduce your risk for: Heart disease , heart attack, and stroke Conditions that lead to heart disease, including high cholesterol , high blood pressure, and obesity Other chronic health problems, including type 2 diabetes , osteoporosis , and some forms of cancer This article makes recommendations that can help prevent heart disease and other conditions that can affect the health of your heart. People who currently have a heart condition such as heart failure or other health problems such as diabetes, should talk with their health care provider about what type of diet is best. You may need to make certain changes to your diet that are not included in these recommendations.











