What is anxiety? Anxiety is a feeling of fear, dread, and uneasiness. It might cause you to sweat, feel restless and tense, and have a rapid heartbeat.   It can be a normal reaction to stress. For example, you might feel anxious when faced with a difficult problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. It can help you to cope. The anxiety may give you a boost of energy or help you focus. But for people with anxiety disorders, the fear is not temporary and can be overwhelming. What are anxiety disorders? Anxiety disorders are conditions in which you have anxiety that does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships. What are the types of anxiety disorders? There are several types of anxiety disorders, including: Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). People with GAD worry about ordinary issues such as health, money, work, and family. But their worries are excessive, and they have them almost every day for at least 6 months. Panic disorder . People with panic disorder have panic attacks. These are sudden, repeated periods of intense fear when there is no danger. The attacks come on quickly and can last several minutes or more. Phobias . People with phobias have an intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Their fear may be about spiders, flying, going to crowded places, or being in social situations (known as social anxiety). What causes anxiety disorders? The cause of anxiety is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, stress , and your environment may play a role. Who is at risk for anxiety disorders? The risk factors for the different types of anxiety disorders can vary. For example, GAD and phobias are more common in women, but social anxiety affects men and women equally. There are some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders, including: Certain personality traits, such as being shy or withdrawn when you are in new situations or meeting new people Traumatic events in early childhood or adulthood Family history of anxiety or other mental disorders Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid problems or arrhythmia What are the symptoms of anxiety disorders? The different types of anxiety disorders can have different symptoms. But they all have a combination of: Anxious thoughts or beliefs that are hard to control. They make you feel restless and tense and interfere with your daily life. They do not go away and can get worse over time. Physical symptoms, such as a pounding or rapid heartbeat, unexplained aches and pains, dizziness , and shortness of breath Changes in behavior, such as avoiding everyday activities you used to do Using caffeine , other substances, and certain medicines can make your symptoms worse. How are anxiety disorders diagnosed? To diagnose anxiety disorders, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may also have a physical exam and lab tests to make sure that a different health problem is not the cause of your symptoms. If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation . Your provider may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. What are the treatments for anxiety disorders? The main treatments for anxiety disorders are psychotherapy (talk therapy), medicines, or both: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy that is often used to treat anxiety disorders. CBT teaches you different ways of thinking and behaving. It can help you change how you react to the things that cause you to feel fear and anxiety. It may include exposure therapy. This focuses on having you confront your fears so that you will be able to do the things that you had been avoiding. Medicines to treat anxiety disorders include anti-anxiety medicines and certain antidepressants . Some types of medicines may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders. You should work closely with your health care provider to identify which medicine is best for you. You may need to try more than one medicine before you can find the right one. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Panic disorder is a type of anxiety disorder .  It causes panic attacks, which are sudden feelings of terror when there is no real danger.  You may feel as if you are losing control. You may also have physical symptoms, such as: Fast heartbeat Chest or stomach pain Breathing difficulty Weakness or dizziness Sweating Feeling hot or a cold chill Tingly or numb hands Panic attacks can happen anytime, anywhere, and without warning. You may live in fear of another attack and may avoid places where you have had an attack. For some people, fear takes over their lives and they cannot leave their homes. Panic disorder is more common in women than men.  It usually starts when people are young adults. Sometimes it starts when a person is under a lot of stress. Most people get better with treatment. Therapy can show you how to recognize and change your thinking patterns before they lead to panic.  Medicines can also help. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health





Agoraphobia is an intense fear and anxiety of being in places where it is hard to escape, or where help might not be available. Agoraphobia usually involves fear of crowds, bridges, or of being outside alone.Agoraphobia is a type of anxiety disorder. The exact cause of agoraphobia is unknown. Agoraphobia sometimes occurs when a person has had a panic attack and begins to fear situations that might lead to another panic attack.

Hyperventilation is rapid and deep breathing. It is also called overbreathing, and it may leave you feeling breathless.You breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide. Excessive breathing creates a low level of carbon dioxide in your blood. This causes many of the symptoms of hyperventilation. You may hyperventilate from an emotional cause such as during a panic attack. Or, it can be due to a medical problem, such as bleeding or infection. Your health care provider will determine the cause of your hyperventilation. Rapid breathing may be a medical emergency and you need to get treated, unless you have had this before and your provider has told you that you can treat it on your own. If you frequently overbreathe, you may have a medical problem called hyperventilation syndrome. When you're overbreathing, you might not be aware you're breathing fast and deep. But you'll likely be aware of the other symptoms, including: Feeling lightheaded, dizzy, weak, or not able to think straight Feeling as if you can't catch your breath Chest pain or fast and pounding heartbeat Belching or bloating Dry mouth Muscle spasms in the hands and feet Numbness and tingling in the arms or around the mouth Problems sleeping

Panic disorder is a type of anxiety disorder in which you have repeated attacks of intense fear that something bad will happen.The cause is unknown. Genes may play a role. Other family members may have the disorder. But panic disorder often occurs when there is no family history. Panic disorder is twice as common in women as it is in men. Symptoms often begin before age 25 but may occur in the mid-30s. Children can also have panic disorder, but it is often not diagnosed until they are older.







A phobia is a type of anxiety disorder .  It is a strong, irrational fear of something that poses little or no real danger. There are many specific phobias. Acrophobia is a fear of heights. Agoraphobia is a fear of public places, and claustrophobia is a fear of closed-in places. If you become anxious and extremely self-conscious in everyday social situations, you could have a social phobia. Other common phobias involve tunnels, highway driving, water, flying, animals and blood. People with phobias try to avoid what they are afraid of. If they cannot, they may experience: Panic and fear Rapid heartbeat Shortness of breath Trembling A strong desire to get away Phobias usually start in children or teens, and continue into adulthood. The causes of specific phobias are not known, but they sometimes run in families. Treatment helps most people with phobias. Options include medicines, therapy or both. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health







A phobia is an ongoing intense fear or anxiety of a certain object, animal, activity, or setting that poses little to no actual danger.Specific phobias are a type of anxiety disorder in which a person may feel extremely anxious or has a panic attack when exposed to the object of fear. Specific phobias are a common mental disorder. Common phobias include the fear of: Being in places where it is hard to escape, such as crowds, bridges, or of being outside alone Blood, injections, and other medical procedures Certain animals (for instance, dogs or snakes) Enclosed spaces Flying High places Insects or spiders Lightning

Social anxiety disorder is a persistent and irrational fear of situations that may involve scrutiny or judgment by others, such as at parties and other social events.People with social anxiety disorder fear and avoid situations in which they may be judged by others. It may begin in the teens and may have to do with overprotective parents or limited social opportunities. Men and women are affected equally with this disorder. People with social phobia are at high risk for alcohol or other drug use . This is because they may come to rely on these substances to relax in social situations.









What is stress? Stress is how your brain and body respond to a challenge or demand. When you are stressed, your body releases chemicals called hormones . The hormones make you alert and ready to act. They can raise your blood pressure, heart rate, and blood sugar levels. This response is sometimes called a "fight or flight" response. Everyone gets stressed from time to time. There are different types of stress. It can be short-term or long-term. It can be caused by something that happens once or something that keeps happening. Not all stress is bad. In fact, it can help you survive in a dangerous situation. For example, one kind of stress is the jolt you may feel when a car pulls out in front of you. This jolt of hormones helps you quickly hit the brakes to avoid an accident. A little short-term stress can sometimes be helpful. For example, the stress of having a deadline for school or your job may push you to get your work done on time. Once you finish it, that stress goes away. But stress that lasts a long time can harm your health. What causes long-term stress? Long-term stress, or chronic stress, lasts for weeks, months, or longer. As you go about your life, your body is acting as if you're being threatened. Causes of long-term stress include: Routine stress from the demands of work, school, family needs, money problems, and other daily pressures that don't stop. Stress from sudden, difficult changes in your life, such as divorce, illness, losing your job, or other unhappy life events that often have a long impact. Traumatic stress, which may happen when you're in danger of serious harm or death. Examples include being in a bad accident, a war, a flood, earthquake, or other frightening event. This type of stress can cause a long-lasting problem called post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). How can long term-stress harm my health? People respond to stress in different ways. If you're stressed for a long time you may notice that you are: Getting sick more often than usual because stress weakens your body's ability to fight germs Having stomach problems or trouble digesting food Having trouble sleeping Having headaches Feeling sad, angry, or easily upset When stress keeps going, your body acts as if you're always in danger. That's a lot of strain that may play a part in developing serious health problems, including: Depression Anxiety Heart disease High blood pressure Diabetes (high blood sugar) It's possible to get used to the symptoms of stress and not even realize there's a problem. So when there's a lot of stress in your life, it's important to pay attention to how it affects you so you can do something about it. How can I manage long-term stress? Simple things that improve your mental health may be helpful in managing long-term stress, such as: Get regular exercise. A 30-minute daily walk can help you feel better and help keep your immune system strong, so you don't get sick. Try relaxing activities. You could look for an app or wellness program that uses breathing, meditation, or muscle relaxation exercises. Get enough sleep every night. Avoid too much caffeine . Decide what you need to do now and what can wait. And focus on what you got done each day, not on what you weren't able to do. Ask your family or friends for support. When should I ask my health care provider for help with stress? Get help if you're having severe symptoms for 2 weeks or more, including: Trouble sleeping Changes in your eating that cause unwanted changes in your weight Troubles getting out of bed because of your mood Difficulty focusing your thoughts Losing interest in things you usually enjoy Not being able to do your usual daily activities Always get help right away if stress is causing you to: Have thoughts of harming yourself Feel you can't cope Use drugs or alcohol more often than usual Your health care provider may refer you to a mental health professional such as a psychologist or social worker. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Hormones are your body's chemical messengers. They travel in your bloodstream to tissues or organs. They work slowly, over time, and affect many different processes, including: Growth and development Metabolism - how your body gets energy from the foods you eat Sexual function Reproduction Mood Endocrine glands, which are special groups of cells, make hormones. The major endocrine glands are the pituitary, pineal, thymus, thyroid, adrenal glands, and pancreas. In addition, men produce hormones in their testes and women produce them in their ovaries. Hormones are powerful. It takes only a tiny amount to cause big changes in cells or even your whole body. That is why too much or too little of a certain hormone can be serious. Laboratory tests can measure the hormone levels in your blood, urine, or saliva.  Your health care provider may perform these tests if you have symptoms of a hormone disorder . Home pregnancy tests are similar - they test for pregnancy hormones in your urine.

What is post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental health disorder that some people develop after they experience or see a traumatic event. The traumatic event may be life-threatening, such as combat, a natural disaster , a car accident, or sexual assault . But sometimes the event is not necessarily a dangerous one. For example, the sudden, unexpected death of a loved one can also cause PTSD. It's normal to feel afraid during and after a traumatic situation. The fear triggers a "fight-or-flight" response. This is your body's way of helping to protect itself from possible harm. It causes changes in your body such as the release of certain hormones and increases in alertness, blood pressure, heart rate, and breathing. In time, most people recover from this naturally. But people with PTSD don't feel better. They feel stressed and frightened long after the trauma is over. In some cases, the PTSD symptoms may start later on. They might also come and go over time. What causes post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? Researchers don't know why some people get PTSD and others don't. Genetics, neurobiology, risk factors, and personal factors may affect whether you get PTSD after a traumatic event. Who is at risk for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? You can develop PTSD at any age. Many risk factors play a part in whether you will develop PTSD. They include: Your sex; women are more likely to develop PTSD Having had trauma in childhood Feeling horror, helplessness, or extreme fear Going through a traumatic event that lasts a long time Having little or no social support after the event Dealing with extra stress after the event, such as loss of a loved one, pain and injury, or loss of a job or home Having a history of mental illness or substance use What are the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? There are four types of PTSD symptoms, but they may not be the same for everyone. Each person experiences symptoms in their own way. The types are: Re-experiencing symptoms , where something reminds you of the trauma and you feel that fear again. Examples include Flashbacks, which cause you to feel like you are going through the event again Nightmares Frightening thoughts Avoidance symptoms , where you try to avoid situations or people that trigger memories of the traumatic event. This may cause you to Stay away from places, events, or objects that are reminders of the traumatic experience. For example, if you were in a car accident, you might stop driving. Avoiding thoughts or feelings related to the traumatic event. For example, you might try to stay very busy to try to avoid thinking about what happened. Arousal and reactivity symptoms , which may cause you to be jittery or be on the lookout for danger. They include Being easily startled Feeling tense or "on edge" Having difficulty sleeping Having angry outbursts Cognition and mood symptoms , which are negative changes in beliefs and feelings. They include Trouble remembering important things about the traumatic event Negative thoughts about yourself or the world Feeling blame and guilt No longer being interested in things you enjoyed Trouble concentrating The symptoms usually start soon after the traumatic event. But sometimes they may not appear until months or years later. They also may come and go over many years. If your symptoms last longer than four weeks, cause you great distress, or interfere with your work or home life, you might have PTSD. How is post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) diagnosed? A health care provider who has experience helping people with mental illnesses can diagnose PTSD. The provider will do a mental health screening and may also do a physical exam. To get a diagnosis of PTSD, you must have all of these symptoms for at least one month: At least one re-experiencing symptom At least one avoidance symptom At least two arousal and reactivity symptoms At least two cognition and mood symptoms What are the treatments for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)? The main treatments for PTSD are talk therapy, medicines, or both. PTSD affects people differently, so a treatment that works for one person may not work for another. If you have PTSD, you need to work with a mental health professional to find the best treatment for your symptoms.: Talk therapy , or psychotherapy, which can teach you about your symptoms. You will learn how to identify what triggers them and how to manage them. There are different types of talk therapy for PTSD. Medicines can help with the symptoms of PTSD. Antidepressants may help control symptoms such as sadness, worry, anger, and feeling numb inside. Other medicines can help with sleep problems and nightmares. Can post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) be prevented? There are certain factors that can help reduce the risk of developing PTSD. These are known as resilience factors, and they include: Seeking out support from other people, such as friends, family, or a support group Learning to feel good about your actions in the face of danger Having a coping strategy or a way of getting through the bad event and learning from it Being able to act and respond effectively despite feeling fear Researchers are studying the importance of the resilience and risk factors for PTSD. They are also studying how genetics and neurobiology can affect the risk of PTSD. With more research, someday it may be possible to predict who is likely to develop PTSD. This could also help in finding ways to prevent it. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Nearly everyone has had indigestion at one time. It's a feeling of discomfort or a burning feeling in your upper abdomen. You may have heartburn or belch and feel bloated. You may also feel nauseated, or even throw up. You might get indigestion from eating too much or too fast, eating high-fat foods, or eating when you're stressed. Smoking, drinking too much alcohol, using some medicines, being tired, and having ongoing stress can also cause indigestion or make it worse. Sometimes the cause is a problem with the digestive tract, like an ulcer or GERD . Avoiding foods and situations that seem to cause it may help. Because indigestion can be a sign of a more serious problem, see your health care provider if it lasts for more than two weeks or if you have severe pain or other symptoms. Your health care provider may use x-rays, lab tests, and an upper endoscopy to diagnose the cause.  You may need medicines to treat the symptoms. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is insomnia? Insomnia is a common sleep disorder . If you have it, you may have trouble falling asleep, staying asleep, or both. As a result, you may get too little sleep or have poor-quality sleep. You may not feel refreshed when you wake up. What are the types of insomnia? Insomnia can be acute (short-term) or chronic (ongoing). Acute insomnia is common. Common causes include stress at work, family pressures, or a traumatic event. It usually lasts for days or weeks. Chronic insomnia lasts for a month or longer. Most cases of chronic insomnia are secondary. This means they are the symptom or side effect of some other problem, such as certain medical conditions, medicines, and other sleep disorders. Substances such as caffeine , tobacco, and alcohol can also be a cause. Sometimes chronic insomnia is the primary problem. This means that it is not caused by something else. Its cause is not well understood, but long-lasting stress, emotional upset, travel and shift work can be factors. Primary insomnia usually lasts more than one month. Who is at risk for insomnia? Insomnia is common. It affects women more often than men. You can get it at any age, but older adults are more likely to have it. You are also at higher risk of insomnia if you: Have a lot of stress Are depressed or have other emotional distress, such as divorce or death of a spouse Have a lower income Work at night or have frequent major shifts in your work hours Travel long distances with time changes Have an inactive lifestyle Are African American; research shows that African Americans take longer to fall asleep, don't sleep as well, and have more sleep-related breathing problems than whites. What are the symptoms of insomnia? Symptoms of insomnia include: Lying awake for a long time before you fall asleep Sleeping for only short periods Being awake for much of the night Feeling as if you haven't slept at all Waking up too early What other problems can insomnia cause? Insomnia can cause daytime sleepiness and a lack of energy. It also can make you feel anxious, depressed, or irritable. You may have trouble focusing on tasks, paying attention, learning, and remembering. Insomnia also can cause other serious problems. For example, it could make you may feel drowsy while driving. This could cause you get into a car accident. How is insomnia diagnosed? To diagnose insomnia, your health care provider: Takes your medical history Asks for your sleep history. Your provider will ask you for details about your sleep habits. Does a physical exam, to rule out other medical problems that might cause insomnia May recommend a sleep study. A sleep study measures how well you sleep and how your body responds to sleep problems. What are the treatments for insomnia? Treatments include lifestyle changes, counseling, and medicines: Lifestyle changes, including good sleep habits , often help relieve acute (short-term) insomnia. These changes might make it easier for you to fall asleep and stay asleep. A type of counseling called cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) can help relieve the anxiety linked to chronic (ongoing) insomnia Several medicines also can help relieve your insomnia and allow you to re-establish a regular sleep schedule If your insomnia is the symptom or side effect of another problem, it's important to treat that problem (if possible). NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Almost everyone has had a headache. Headache is the most common form of pain. It's a major reason people miss days at work or school or visit the doctor. The most common type of headache is a tension headache. Tension headaches are due to tight muscles in your shoulders, neck, scalp and jaw. They are often related to stress, depression or anxiety. You are more likely to get tension headaches if you work too much, don't get enough sleep, miss meals, or use alcohol. Other common types of headaches include migraines , cluster headaches, and sinus headaches. Most people can feel much better by making lifestyle changes, learning ways to relax and taking pain relievers . Not all headaches require a doctor's attention. But sometimes headaches warn of a more serious disorder. Let your health care provider know if you have sudden, severe headaches. Get medical help right away if you have a headache after a blow to your head, or if you have a headache along with a stiff neck, fever, confusion, loss of consciousness, or pain in the eye or ear. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke

Depression is a serious medical illness. It's more than just a feeling of being sad or "blue" for a few days. If you are one of the more than 19 million teens and adults in the United States who have depression, the feelings do not go away. They persist and interfere with your everyday life. Symptoms can include: Feeling sad or "empty" Loss of interest in favorite activities Overeating, or not wanting to eat at all Not being able to sleep, or sleeping too much Feeling very tired Feeling hopeless, irritable, anxious, or guilty Aches or pains, headaches, cramps, or digestive problems Thoughts of death or suicide Depression is a disorder of the brain. There are a variety of causes, including genetic, biological, environmental, and psychological factors. Depression can happen at any age, but it often begins in teens and young adults. It is much more common in women. Women can also get postpartum depression after the birth of a baby. Some people get seasonal affective disorder in the winter. Depression is one part of bipolar disorder . There are effective treatments for depression, including antidepressants , talk therapy, or both. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health



If you're like most people, you think that heart disease is a problem for others. But heart disease is the number one killer in the U.S. It is also a major cause of disability. There are many different forms of heart disease. The most common cause of heart disease is narrowing or blockage of the coronary arteries, the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart itself. This is called coronary artery disease and 
happens slowly over time. It's the major reason people have heart attacks . Other kinds of heart problems may happen to the valves in the heart, or the heart may not pump well and cause heart failure . Some people are born with heart disease. You can help reduce your risk of heart disease by taking steps to control factors that put you at greater risk: Control your blood pressure Lower your cholesterol Don't smoke Get enough exercise NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is blood pressure? Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is called diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually the systolic number comes before or above the diastolic number. For example, 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80. How is high blood pressure diagnosed? High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regular blood pressure checks from your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. He or she will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis. Blood Pressure Category Systolic Blood Pressure Diastolic Blood Pressure Normal Less than 120 and Less than 80 High Blood Pressure (no other heart risk factors) 140 or higher or 90 or higher High Blood Pressure (with other heart risk factors, according to some providers) 130 or higher or 80 or higher Dangerously high blood pressure - seek medical care right away 180 or higher and 120 or higher For children and teens, the health care provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and sex. What are the different types of high blood pressure? There are two main types of high blood pressure: primary and secondary high blood pressure.: Primary, or essential, high blood pressure is the most common type of high blood pressure. For most people who get this kind of blood pressure, it develops over time as you get older. Secondary high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or use of certain medicines. It usually gets better after you treat that condition or stop taking the medicines that are causing it. Why do I need to worry about high blood pressure? When your blood pressure stays high over time, it causes the heart to pump harder and work overtime, possibly leading to serious health problems such as heart attack , stroke , heart failure , and kidney failure . What are the treatments for high blood pressure? Treatments for high blood pressure include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines . You will work with your provider to come up with a treatment plan. It may include only the lifestyle changes. These changes, such as heart-healthy eating and exercise, can be very effective. But sometimes the changes do not control or lower your high blood pressure. Then you may need to take medicine. There are different types of blood pressure medicines. Some people need to take more than one type. If your high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or medicine, treating that condition or stopping the medicine may lower your blood pressure. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Diabetes is a disease in which your blood glucose, or blood sugar , levels are too high.  Glucose comes from the foods you eat. Insulin is a hormone that helps the glucose get into your cells to give them energy.  With type 1 diabetes , your body does not make insulin.  With type 2 diabetes , the more common type, your body does not make or use insulin well. Without enough insulin, the glucose stays in your blood. You can also have prediabetes .  This means that your blood sugar is higher than normal but not high enough to be called diabetes.  Having prediabetes puts you at a higher risk of getting type 2 diabetes. Over time, having too much glucose in your blood can cause serious problems .    It can damage your eyes , kidneys , and nerves . Diabetes can also cause heart disease , stroke and even the need to remove a limb. Pregnant women can also get diabetes, called gestational diabetes . Blood tests can show if you have diabetes. One type of test, the A1C , can also check on how you are managing your diabetes. Exercise, weight control and sticking to your meal plan can help control your diabetes. You should also monitor your blood glucose level and take medicine if prescribed. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is mental health? Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being. It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress , relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, from childhood and adolescence through adulthood and aging . Why is mental health important? Mental health is important because it can help you to: Cope with the stresses of life Be physically healthy Have good relationships Make meaningful contributions to your community Work productively Realize your full potential How can I improve my mental health? There are many different things you can do to improve your mental health, including: Staying positive. It's important to try to have a positive outlook; some ways to do that include Finding balance between positive and negative emotions.  Staying positive doesn't mean that you never feel negative emotions, such as sadness or anger. You need to feel them so that you can move through difficult situations. They can help you to respond to a problem. But you don't want those emotions to take over. For example, it's not helpful to keep thinking about bad things that happened in the past or worry too much about the future. Trying to hold on to the positive emotions when you have them Taking a break from negative information. Know when to stop watching or reading the news. Use social media to reach out for support and feel connected to others but be careful. Don't fall for rumors, get into arguments, or negatively compare your life to others. Practicing gratitude , which means being thankful for the good things in your life. It's helpful to do this every day, either by thinking about what you are grateful for or writing it down in a journal. These can be big things, such as the support you have from loved ones, or little things, such as enjoying a nice meal. It's important to allow yourself a moment to enjoy that you had the positive experience.  Practicing gratitude can help you to see your life differently. For example, when you are stressed, you may not notice that there are also moments when you have some positive emotions. Gratitude can help you to recognize them. Taking care of your physical health , since your physical and mental health are connected. Some ways to take care of your physical health include Being physically active . Exercise can reduce feelings of stress and depression and improve your mood. Getting enough sleep . Sleep affects your mood. If you don't get a good sleep, you may become more easily annoyed and angry. Over the long term, a lack of quality sleep can make you more likely to become depressed. So it's important to make sure that you have a regular sleep schedule and get enough quality sleep every night. Healthy eating . Good nutrition will help you feel better physically but could also improve your mood and decrease anxiety and stress. Also, not having enough of certain nutrients may contribute to some mental illnesses. For example, there may be a link between low levels of vitamin B12 and depression. Eating a well-balanced diet can help you to get enough of the nutrients you need. Connecting with others. Humans are social creatures, and it's important to have strong, healthy relationships with others. Having good social support may help protect you against the harms of stress. It is also good to have different types of connections. Besides connecting with family and friends, you could find ways to get involved with your community or neighborhood. For example, you could volunteer for a local organization or join a group that is focused on a hobby you enjoy. Developing a sense of meaning and purpose in life. This could be through your job, volunteering, learning new skills, or exploring your spirituality. Developing coping skills , which are methods you use to deal with stressful situations. They may help you face a problem, take action, be flexible, and not easily give up in solving it. Meditation , which is a mind and body practice where you learn to focus your attention and awareness. There are many types, including mindfulness meditation and transcendental meditation. Meditation usually involves A quiet location with as few distractions as possible A specific, comfortable posture. This could be sitting, lying down, walking, or another position. A focus of attention, such as a specially chosen word or set of words, an object, or your breathing An open attitude, where you try to let distractions come and go naturally without judging them Relaxation techniques are practices you do to produce your body's natural relaxation response. This slows down your breathing, lowers your blood pressure, and reduces muscle tension and stress. Types of relaxation techniques include Progressive relaxation, where you tighten and relax different muscle groups, sometimes while using mental imagery or breathing exercises Guided imagery, where you learn to focus on positive images in your mind, to help you feel more relaxed and focused Biofeedback, where you use electronic devices to learn to control certain body functions, such as breathing, heart rate, and muscle tension Self-hypnosis, where the goal is to get yourself into a relaxed, trance-like state when you hear a certain suggestion or see a specific cue Deep breathing exercises, which involve focusing on taking slow, deep, even breaths It's also important to recognize when you need to get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders . If you don't know where to get treatment, start by contacting your primary care provider.

Regular exercise is one of the best things you can do for your health. It has many benefits , including improving your overall health and fitness, and reducing your risk for many chronic diseases. There are many different types of exercise; it is important that you pick the right types for you. Most people benefit from a combination of them: Endurance, or aerobic, activities increase your breathing and heart rate. They keep your heart, lungs, and circulatory system healthy and improve your overall fitness. Examples include brisk walking, jogging, swimming, and biking. Strength, or resistance training, exercises make your muscles stronger. Some examples are lifting weights and using a resistance band. Balance exercises can make it easier to walk on uneven surfaces and help prevent falls. To improve your balance, try tai chi or exercises like standing on one leg. Flexibility exercises stretch your muscles and can help your body stay limber. Yoga and doing various stretches can make you more flexible. Fitting regular exercise into your daily schedule may seem difficult at first. But you can start slowly, and break your exercise time into chunks. Even doing ten minutes at a time is fine. You can work your way up to doing the recommended amount of exercise. How much exercise you need depends on your age and health. Other things that you can do to make the most of your workouts include: Choosing activities that work all the different parts of the body, including your core (muscles around your back, abdomen, and pelvis). Good core strength improves balance and stability and helps to prevent lower back injury. Choosing activities that you enjoy. It's easier to make exercise a regular part of your life if you have fun doing it. Exercising safely , with proper equipment, to prevent injuries . Also, listen to your body and don't overdo it. Giving yourself goals. The goals should challenge you, but also be realistic. It's also helpful to reward yourself when you reach your goals. The rewards could be something big, like new workout gear, or something smaller, such as movie tickets.

What is sleep? While you are sleeping, you are unconscious, but your brain and body functions are still active. Sleep is a complex biological process that helps you process new information, stay healthy, and feel rested. During sleep, your brain cycles through five stages: stage 1, 2, 3, 4, and rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. Different things happen during each stage. For example, you have a different pattern of brain waves during each one. Your breathing, heart, and temperature may be slower or faster in some stages. Certain phases of sleep help you : Feel rested and energetic the next day Learn information, get insight, and form memories Give your heart and vascular system a rest Release more growth hormone, which helps children grow. It also boosts muscle mass and the repair of cells and tissues in children and adults. Release sex hormones, which contributes to puberty and fertility Keep from getting sick or help you get better when you are sick, by creating more cytokines (hormones that help the immune system fight various infections) You need all of the stages to get a healthy sleep. How much sleep do I need? The amount of sleep you need depends on several factors, including your age, lifestyle, health, and whether you have been getting enough sleep recently. The general recommendations for sleep are: Newborns: 16-18 hours a day Preschool-aged children: 11-12 hours a day School-aged children: At least 10 hours a day Teens: 9-10 hours a day Adults (including older adults): 7-8 hours a day During puberty, teenagers' biological clocks shift, and they are more likely to go to bed later than younger children and adults, and they tend to want to sleep later in the morning. This delayed sleep-wake rhythm conflicts with the early-morning start times of many high schools and helps explain why most teenagers do not get enough sleep. Some people think that adults need less sleep as they age. But there is no evidence to show that older adults can get by with less sleep than people who are younger. As people age, however, they often get less sleep or they tend to spend less time in the deep, restful stage of sleep. Older adults are also more easily awakened. And it's not just the number of hours of sleep you get that matters. The quality of the sleep you get is also important. People whose sleep is frequently interrupted or cut short might not get enough of certain stages of sleep. If you are wondering whether you are getting enough sleep, including quality sleep, ask yourself: Do you have trouble getting up in the morning? Do you have trouble focusing during the day? Do you doze off during the day? If you answered yes to these three questions, you should work on improving your sleep. What are the health effects of not getting enough sleep? Sleep is important for overall health. When you don't get enough sleep (sleep deprivation), it does more than just make you feel tired. It can affect your performance, including your ability to think clearly, react quickly, and form memories. This may cause you to make bad decisions and take more risks. People with sleep deprivation are more likely to get into accidents. Sleep deprivation can also affect your mood, leading to: Irritability Problems with relationships, especially for children and teenagers Depression Anxiety It can also affect your physical health. Research shows that not getting enough sleep, or getting poor-quality sleep, increases your risk of: High blood pressure Heart disease Stroke Kidney disease Obesity Type 2 diabetes Not getting enough sleep can also mean that you don't get enough of the hormones that help children grow and help adults and children build muscle mass, fight infections, and repair cells. Sleep deprivation magnifies the effect of alcohol. A tired person who drinks too much alcohol will be more impaired than a well-rested person. How can I get better sleep? You can take steps to improve your sleep habits. First, make sure that you allow yourself enough time to sleep. With enough sleep each night, you may find that you're happier and more productive during the day. To improve your sleep habits, it also may help to: Go to bed and wake up at the same time every day Avoid caffeine , especially in the afternoon and evening Avoid nicotine Exercise regularly, but don't exercise too late in the day Avoid alcoholic drinks before bed Avoid large meals and beverages late at night Don't take a nap after 3 p.m. Relax before bed, for example by taking a bath, reading or listening to relaxing music Keep the temperature in your bedroom cool Get rid of distractions such as noises, bright lights, and a TV or computer in the bedroom. Also, don't be tempted to go on your phone or tablet just before bed. Get enough sunlight exposure during the day Don't lie in bed awake; if you can't sleep for 20 minutes, get up and do something relaxing See a doctor if you have continued trouble sleeping. You may have a sleep disorder , such as insomnia or sleep apnea .  In some cases, your doctor may suggest trying over-the-counter or prescription sleep aid. In other cases, your doctor may want you to do a sleep study, to help diagnose the problem. If you are a shift worker, it can be even harder to get a good sleep. You may also want to: Take naps and increase the amount of time available for sleep Keep the lights bright at work Limit shift changes so your body clock can adjust Limit caffeine use to the first part of your shift Remove sound and light distractions in your bedroom during daytime sleep (for example, use light-blocking curtains)

What is caffeine? Caffeine is a bitter substance that occurs naturally in more than 60 plants including: Coffee beans Tea leaves Kola nuts, which are used to flavor soft drink colas Cacao pods, which are used to make chocolate products There is also synthetic (man-made) caffeine, which is added to some medicines, foods, and drinks. For example, some pain relievers, cold medicines, and over-the-counter medicines for alertness contain synthetic caffeine. So do energy drinks and "energy-boosting" gums and snacks. Most people consume caffeine from drinks. The amount of caffeine in different drinks can vary a lot, but it is generally: An 8-ounce cup of coffee: 95-200 mg A 12-ounce can of cola: 35-45 mg An 8-ounce energy drink: 70-100 mg An 8-ounce cup of tea: 14-60 mg What are caffeine's effects on the body? Caffeine has many effects on your body's metabolism. It: Stimulates your central nervous system, which can make you feel more awake and give you a boost of energy Is a diuretic, meaning that it helps your body get rid of extra salt and water by urinating more Increases the release of acid in your stomach, sometimes leading to an upset stomach or heartburn May interfere with the absorption of calcium in the body Increases your blood pressure Within one hour of eating or drinking caffeine, it reaches its peak level in your blood. You may continue to feel the effects of caffeine for four to six hours. What are the side effects from too much caffeine? For most people, it is not harmful to consume up to 400mg of caffeine a day. If you do eat or drink too much caffeine, it can cause health problems, such as: Restlessness and shakiness Insomnia Headaches Dizziness Fast heart rate Dehydration Anxiety Dependency, so you need to take more of it to get the same results Some people are more sensitive to the effects of caffeine than others. What are energy drinks, and why can they be a problem? Energy drinks are beverages that have added caffeine. The amount of caffeine in energy drinks can vary widely, and sometimes the labels on the drinks do not give you the actual amount of caffeine in them. Energy drinks may also contain sugars, vitamins, herbs, and supplements. Companies that make energy drinks claim that the drinks can increase alertness and improve physical and mental performance. This has helped make the drinks popular with American teens and young adults. There's limited data showing that energy drinks might temporarily improve alertness and physical endurance. There is not enough evidence to show that they enhance strength or power. But what we do know is that energy drinks can be dangerous because they have large amounts of caffeine. And since they have lots of sugar, they can contribute to weight gain and worsen diabetes. Sometimes young people mix their energy drinks with alcohol. It is dangerous to combine alcohol and caffeine. Caffeine can interfere with your ability to recognize how drunk you are, which can lead you to drink more. This also makes you more likely to make bad decisions. Who should avoid or limit caffeine? You should check with your health care provider about whether you should limit or avoid caffeine if you: Are pregnant , since caffeine passes through the placenta to your baby. Are breastfeeding , since a small amount of caffeine that you consume is passed along to your baby. Have sleep disorders , including insomnia. Have migraines or other chronic headaches. Have anxiety. Have GERD or ulcers . Have arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat). Have high blood pressure . Take certain medicines or supplements, including stimulants, certain antibiotics , asthma medicines, and heart medicines. Check with your health care provider about whether there might be interactions between caffeine and any medicines and supplements that you take. Are a child or teen. Neither should have as much caffeine as adults. Children can be especially sensitive to the effects of caffeine. What is caffeine withdrawal? If you have been consuming caffeine on a regular basis and then suddenly stop, you may have caffeine withdrawal. Symptoms can include: Headaches Drowsiness Irritability Nausea Trouble concentrating These symptoms usually go away after a couple of days.



Adjustment disorder is a group of symptoms, such as stress, feeling sad or hopeless, and physical symptoms that can occur after you go through a stressful life event. The symptoms occur because you are having a hard time coping. Your reaction is stronger than expected for the type of event that occurred.Many different events may trigger symptoms of an adjustment disorder. Whatever the trigger is, the event may become too much for you. Stressors for people of any age include: Death of a loved one Divorce or problems with a relationship General life changes Illness or other health issues in yourself or a loved one Moving to a different home or a different city Unexpected catastrophes Worries about money Triggers of stress in teenagers and young adults may include: Family problems or conflict School problems Sexuality issues There is no way to predict which people who are affected by the same stress are likely to develop adjustment disorder. Your social skills before the event and how you have learned to deal with stress in the past may play roles.

Teenagers face a variety of stresses. For some, it is trying to balance a part-time job with mountains of homework. Others may have to help out at home or deal with bullying or peer pressure. Whatever the cause, starting down the road to adulthood has its own special challenges. You can help your teen by learning to recognize the signs of stress and teaching your child healthy ways to deal with it.Common sources of stress in teens include: Worrying about schoolwork or grades Juggling responsibilities, such as school and work or sports Having problems with friends, bullying, or peer group pressures Becoming sexually active or feeling pressure to do so Changing schools, moving, or dealing with housing problems or homelessness Having negative thoughts about themselves Going through body changes, in both boys and girls Seeing their parents go through a divorce or separation Having financial problems in the family Living in an unsafe home or neighborhood Figuring out what to do after high school Getting into college

We all feel stress at one time or another. It's a normal and healthy reaction to change or a challenge. But stress that goes on for more than a few weeks can affect your health . Keep stress from making you sick by learning healthy ways to manage it.LEARN TO RECOGNIZE STRESS The first step in managing stress is recognizing it in your life. Everyone feels stress in a different way. You may get angry or irritable, lose sleep, or have headaches or stomach upset. What are your signs of stress? Once you know what signals to look for, you can start to manage it. Also identify the situations that cause you stress. These are called stressors. Your stressors could be family, school, work, relationships, money, or health problems. Once you understand where your stress is coming from, you can come up with ways to deal with your stressors. AVOID UNHEALTHY STRESS RELIEF When you feel stressed, you may fall back on unhealthy behaviors to help you relax. These may include: Eating too much Smoking cigarettes Drinking alcohol or using drugs Sleeping too much or not sleeping enough These behaviors may help you feel better at first, but they may hurt you more than they help. Instead, use the tips below to find healthy ways to reduce your stress. FIND HEALTHY STRESS BUSTERS There are many healthy ways to manage stress. Try a few and see which ones work best for you. Recognize the things you can't change. Accepting that you can't change certain things allows you to let go and not get upset. For instance, you cannot change the fact that you have to drive during rush hour. But you can look for ways to relax during your commute, such as listening to a podcast or book. Avoid stressful situations. When you can, remove yourself from the source of stress. For example, if your family squabbles during the holidays, give yourself a breather and go out for a walk or drive. Get exercise. Getting physical activity every day is one of the easiest and best ways to cope with stress. When you exercise, your brain releases chemicals that make you feel good. It can also help you release built-up energy or frustration. Find something you enjoy, whether it is walking, cycling, softball, swimming, or dancing, and do it for at least 30 minutes on most days. Change your outlook. Try to develop a more positive attitude toward challenges. You can do this by replacing negative thoughts with more positive ones. For example, rather than thinking, "Why does everything always go wrong?" change this thought to, "I can find a way to get through this." It may seem hard or silly at first, but with practice, you may find it helps turn your outlook around. Do something you enjoy. When stress has you down, do something you enjoy to help pick you up. It could be as simple as reading a good book, listening to music, watching a favorite movie, or having dinner with a friend. Or, take up a new hobby or class. Whatever you choose, try to do at least one thing a day that's just for you. Learn new ways to relax. Practicing relaxation techniques is a great way to handle daily stress. Relaxation techniques help slow your heart rate and lower your blood pressure. There are many types, from deep breathing and meditation to yoga and tai chi. Take a class, or try learning from books, videos, or online sources. Connect with loved ones. Do not let stress get in the way of being social. Spending time with family and friends can help you feel better and forget about your stress. Confiding in a friend may also help you work out your problems. Get enough sleep. Getting a good night's sleep can help you think more clearly and have more energy. This will make it easier to handle any problems that crop up. Aim for about 7 to 9 hours each night. Maintain a healthy diet. Eating healthy foods helps fuel your body and mind. Skip the high-sugar snack foods and load up on vegetables, fruits, whole grains, low-fat or nonfat dairy, and lean proteins. Learn to say no. If your stress comes from taking on too much at home or work , learn to set limits. Ask others for help when you need it. RESOURCES If you can't manage stress on your own, you may want to talk with your health care provider. Or consider seeing a therapist or counselor who can help you find other ways to deal with your stress. Depending on the cause of your stress, you also may find it helps to join a support group.

Almost everyone feels job stress at times, even if you like your job. You may feel stress about hours, coworkers, deadlines, or possible layoffs. Some stress is motivating and can help you achieve. But when job stress is constant, it can lead to health problems. Finding ways to relieve your stress can help you stay healthy and feel better.Although the cause of job stress is different for every person, there are some common sources of stress in the workplace. These include: Workload. This can include working long hours, having few breaks, or juggling a very heavy workload. Work roles. It can cause stress if you do not have a clear work role, you have too many roles, or you have to answer to more than one person. Job conditions. A job that is physically demanding or dangerous can be stressful. So can working at a job that exposes you to loud noise, pollution, or toxic chemicals. Management. You may feel stress if management does not allow workers a say in making decisions, lacks organization, or has policies that are not family-friendly. Issues with others. Problems with your boss or coworkers are a common source of stress. Fear for your future. You may feel stress if you are worried about layoffs or not advancing in your career.

Chronic stress can be bad for your body and mind. It can put you at risk for health problems such as high blood pressure, stomachaches, headaches, anxiety, and depression. Using relaxation techniques can help you feel calm. These exercises can also help you manage stress and ease the effects of stress on your body .When you feel stress, your body responds by releasing hormones that increase your blood pressure and raise your heart rate. This is called the stress response. Relaxation techniques can help your body relax and lower your blood pressure and heart rate. This is called a relaxation response. There are several exercises you can try. See which ones work best for you.

Stress is a feeling of emotional or physical tension. It can come from any event or thought that makes you feel frustrated, angry, or nervous. Stress is your body's reaction to a challenge or demand. In short bursts, stress can be positive, such as when it helps you avoid danger or meet a deadline. But when stress lasts for a long time, it may harm your health.Stress is a normal feeling. There are two main types of stress: Acute stress. This is short-term stress that goes away quickly. You feel it when you slam on the brakes, have a fight with your partner, or ski down a steep slope. It helps you manage dangerous situations. It also occurs when you do something new or exciting. All people have acute stress at one time or another. Chronic stress. This is stress that lasts for a longer period of time. You may have chronic stress if you have money problems, an unhappy marriage, or trouble at work. Any type of stress that goes on for weeks or months is chronic stress. You can become so used to chronic stress that you don't realize it is a problem. If you don't find ways to manage stress , it may lead to health problems. STRESS AND YOUR BODY Your body reacts to stress by releasing hormones. These hormones make your brain more alert, cause your muscles to tense, and increase your pulse. In the short term, these reactions are good because they can help you handle the situation causing stress. This is your body's way of protecting itself. When you have chronic stress, your body stays alert, even though there is no danger. Over time, this puts you at risk for health problems, including: High blood pressure Heart disease Diabetes Obesity Depression or anxiety Skin problems, such as acne or eczema Menstrual problems If you already have a health condition, chronic stress can make it worse. SIGNS OF TOO MUCH STRESS Stress can cause many types of physical and emotional symptoms. Sometimes, you may not realize these symptoms are caused by stress. Here are some signs that stress may be affecting you: Diarrhea or constipation Forgetfulness Frequent aches and pains Headaches Lack of energy or focus Sexual problems Stiff jaw or neck Tiredness Trouble sleeping or sleeping too much Upset stomach Use of alcohol or drugs to relax Weight loss or gain

Stress is the way your mind and body react to a threat or a challenge. Simple things, like a crying child, can cause stress. You also feel stress when you're in danger, like during a robbery or car crash. Even positive things, like getting married, can be stressful. Stress is a fact of life. But when it adds up, it can affect your mental and physical health. Too much stress can also be bad for your heart.Your body responds to stress on many levels. First, it releases stress hormones that make you breathe faster. Your blood pressure goes up. Your muscles tense up and your mind races. All of this puts you in gear to deal with an immediate threat. The problem is that your body reacts the same way to all types of stress, even when you're not in danger. Over time, these stress-related reactions can cause health problems. Common symptoms of stress include: Upset stomach Inability to focus Trouble sleeping Headaches Anxiety Mood swings

Childhood stress can be present in any setting that requires the child to adapt or change. Stress may be caused by positive changes, such as starting a new activity, but it is most commonly linked with negative changes such as illness or death in the family. You can help your child by learning to recognize the signs of stress and teaching your child healthy ways to deal with it.Stress may be a response to a negative change in a child's life. In small amounts, stress can be good. But, excessive stress can affect the way a child thinks, acts, and feels. Children learn how to respond to stress as they grow and develop. Many stressful events that an adult can manage will cause stress in a child. As a result, even small changes can impact a child's feelings of safety and security. Pain, injury, illness, and other changes are stressors for children. Stressors may include: Worrying about schoolwork or grades Juggling responsibilities, such as school and work or sports Problems with friends, bullying, or peer group pressures Changing schools, moving, or dealing with housing problems or homelessness Having negative thoughts about themselves Going through body changes, in both boys and girls Seeing parents go through a divorce or separation Money problems in the family Living in an unsafe home or neighborhood SIGNS OF UNRESOLVED STRESS IN CHILDREN Children may not recognize that they are stressed. New or worsening symptoms may lead parents to suspect an increased stress level is present. Physical symptoms can include: Decreased appetite, other changes in eating habits Headache New or recurrent bedwetting Nightmares Sleep disturbances Upset stomach or vague stomach pain Other physical symptoms with no physical illness Emotional or behavioral symptoms may include: Anxiety, worry Not able to relax New or recurring fears (fear of the dark, fear of being alone, fear of strangers) Clinging, unwilling to let you out of sight Anger, crying, whining Not able to control emotions Aggressive or stubborn behavior Going back to behaviors present at a younger age Doesn't want to participate in family or school activities HOW PARENTS CAN HELP Parents can help children respond to stress in healthy ways. Following are some tips: Provide a safe, secure, and dependable home. Family routines can be comforting. Having a family dinner or movie night can help relieve or prevent stress. Be a role model. The child looks to you as a model for healthy behavior. Do your best to keep your own stress under control and manage it in healthy ways. Be careful about which television programs, books, and games that young children watch, read, and play. News broadcasts and violent shows or games can produce fears and anxiety. Keep your child informed of anticipated changes such as in jobs or moving. Spend calm, relaxed time with your children. Learn to listen. Listen to your child without being critical or trying to solve the problem right away. Instead work with your child to help them understand and solve what is upsetting to them. Build your child's feelings of self-worth. Use encouragement and affection. Use rewards, not punishment . Try to involve your child in activities where they can succeed. Allow the child opportunities to make choices and have some control in their life. The more your child feels they have control over a situation, the better their response to stress will be. Encourage physical activity. Recognize signs of unresolved stress in your child. Seek help or advice from a health care provider, counselor, or therapist when signs of stress do not decrease or disappear. WHEN TO CALL THE DOCTOR Talk to your child's provider if your child: Is becoming withdrawn, more unhappy, or depressed Is having problems in school or interacting with friends or family Is unable to control their behavior or anger



What is mental health? Mental health includes our emotional, psychological, and social well-being.  It affects how we think, feel, and act as we cope with life. It also helps determine how we handle stress , relate to others, and make choices. Mental health is important at every stage of life, from childhood and adolescence through adulthood and aging . What are mental disorders? Mental disorders are serious conditions which can affect your thinking, mood, and behavior. They may be occasional or long-lasting. They can affect your ability to relate to others and function each day. Mental disorders are common; more than half of all Americans will be diagnosed with one at some time in their life. But there are treatments. People with mental disorders can get better, and many of them recover completely. Why is mental health important? Mental health is important because it can help you to: Cope with the stresses of life Be physically healthy Have good relationships Make meaningful contributions to your community Work productively Realize your full potential Your mental health is also important because it can affect your physical health. For example, mental disorders can raise your risk for physical health problems such as stroke , type 2 diabetes , and heart disease . What can affect my mental health? There are many different factors that can affect your mental health, including: Biological factors, such as genes or brain chemistry Life experiences, such as trauma or abuse Family history of mental health problems Your lifestyle, such as diet, physical activity, and substance use You can also affect your mental health by taking steps to improve it , such as doing meditation, using relaxation techniques, and practicing gratitude. Can my mental health change over time? Over time, your mental health can change. For example, you may be dealing with a difficult situation, such as trying to manage a chronic illness, taking care of an ill relative, or facing money problems. The situation may wear you out and overwhelm your ability to cope with it. This can worsen your mental health. On the other hand, getting therapy may improve your mental health. What are the signs that I might have a mental health problem? When it comes to your emotions, it can be hard to know what is normal and what is not. There are warning signs that you may have a mental health problem, including: A change in your eating or sleeping habits Withdrawing from the people and activities you enjoy Having low or no energy Feeling numb or like nothing matters Having unexplained aches and pains Feeling helpless or hopeless Smoking, drinking, or using drugs more than usual Feeling unusually confused, forgetful, angry, upset, worried, or scared Having severe mood swings that cause problems in your relationships Having thoughts and memories that you can't get out of your head Hearing voices or believing things that are not true Thinking of harming yourself or others Not being able to perform daily tasks like taking care of your kids or getting to work or school What should I do if I think I have a mental health problem? If you think that you may have a mental health problem, get help. Talk therapy and/or medicines can treat mental disorders. If you don't know where to start, contact your primary care provider.









What are mental disorders? Mental disorders (or mental illnesses) are conditions that affect your thinking, feeling, mood, and behavior. They may be occasional or long-lasting (chronic). They can affect your ability to relate to others and function each day. What are some types of mental disorders? There are many different types of mental disorders. Some common ones include: Anxiety disorders , including panic disorder , obsessive-compulsive disorder , and phobias Depression , bipolar disorder , and other mood disorders Eating disorders Personality disorders Post-traumatic stress disorder Psychotic disorders , including schizophrenia What causes mental disorders? There is no single cause for mental illness. A number of factors can contribute to risk for mental illness, such as: Your genes and family history Your life experiences, such as stress or a history of abuse, especially if they happen in childhood Biological factors such as chemical imbalances in the brain A traumatic brain injury A mother's exposure to viruses or toxic chemicals while pregnant Use of alcohol or recreational drugs Having a serious medical condition like cancer Having few friends, and feeling lonely or isolated Mental disorders are not caused by character flaws. They have nothing to do with being lazy or weak. Who is at risk for mental disorders? Mental disorders are common. More than half of all Americans will be diagnosed with a mental disorder at some time in their life. How are mental disorders diagnosed? The steps to getting a diagnosis include: A medical history A physical exam and possibly lab tests, if your provider thinks that other medical conditions could be causing your symptoms A psychological evaluation . You will answer questions about your thinking, feelings, and behaviors. What are the treatments for mental disorders? Treatment depends on which mental disorder you have and how serious it is. You and your provider will work on a treatment plan just for you. It usually involves some type of therapy. You may also take medicines. Some people also need social support and education on managing their condition. In some cases, you may need more intensive treatment. You may need to go to a psychiatric hospital.  This could be because your mental illness is severe. Or it could be because you are at risk of hurting yourself or someone else. In the hospital, you will get counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients.





What is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental disorder in which you have thoughts (obsessions) and rituals (compulsions) over and over. They interfere with your life, but you cannot control or stop them. What causes obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? The cause of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, and your environment may play a role. Who is at risk for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) usually begins when you are a teen or young adult. Boys often develop OCD at a younger age than girls. Risk factors for OCD include: Family history. People with a first-degree relative (such as a parent, sibling, or child) who has OCD are at higher risk. This is especially true if the relative developed OCD as a child or teen. Brain structure and functioning. Imaging studies have shown that people with OCD have differences in certain parts of the brain. Researchers need to do more studies to understand the connection between the brain differences and OCD. Childhood trauma, such as child abuse . Some studies have found a link between trauma in childhood and OCD. More research is needed to understand this relationship better. In some cases, children may develop OCD or OCD symptoms following a streptococcal infection . This is called Pediatric Autoimmune Neuropsychiatric Disorders Associated with Streptococcal Infections (PANDAS). What are the symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? People with OCD may have symptoms of obsessions, compulsions, or both: Obsessions are repeated thoughts, urges, or mental images that cause anxiety . They may involve things such as Fear of germs or contamination Fear of losing or misplacing something Worries about harm coming towards yourself or others Unwanted forbidden thoughts involving sex or religion Aggressive thoughts towards yourself or others Needing things lined up exactly or arranged in a particular, precise way Compulsions are behaviors that you feel like you need to do over and over to try to reduce your anxiety or stop the obsessive thoughts. Some common compulsions include Excessive cleaning and/or handwashing Repeatedly checking on things, such as whether the door is locked or the oven is off Compulsive counting Ordering and arranging things in a particular, precise way Some people with OCD also have a Tourette syndrome or another tic disorder. Tics are sudden twitches, movements, or sounds that people do repeatedly. People who have tics cannot stop their body from doing these things. How is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) diagnosed? The first step is to talk with your health care provider about your symptoms. Your provider should do an exam and ask you about your medical history. He or she needs to make sure that a physical problem is not causing your symptoms. If it seems to be a mental problem, your provider may refer you to a mental health specialist for further evaluation or treatment. Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) can sometimes be hard to diagnose. Its symptoms are like those of other mental disorders, such as anxiety disorders. It is also possible to have both OCD and another mental disorder. Not everyone who has obsessions or compulsions has OCD. Your symptoms would usually be considered OCD when you: Can't control your thoughts or behaviors, even when you know that they are excessive Spend at least 1 hour a day on these thoughts or behaviors Don't get pleasure when performing the behaviors. But doing them may briefly give you relief from the anxiety that your thoughts cause. Have significant problems in your daily life because of these thoughts or behaviors What are the treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)? The main treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) are cognitive behavioral therapy, medicines, or both: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy. It teaches you different ways of thinking, behaving, and reacting to the obsessions and compulsions. One specific type of CBT that can treat OCD is called Exposure and Response Prevention (EX/RP). EX/RP involves gradually exposing you to your fears or obsessions. You learn healthy ways to deal with the anxiety they cause. Medicines for OCD include certain types of antidepressants . If those don't work for you, your provider may suggest taking some other type of psychiatric medicine. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health





What is bipolar disorder? Bipolar disorder is a mood disorder that can cause intense mood swings: Sometimes you may feel extremely "up," elated, irritable, or energized. This is called a manic episode . Other times you may feel "down," sad, indifferent, or hopeless. This is called a depressive episode . You may have both manic and depressive symptoms together. This is called a mixed episode . Along with the mood swings, bipolar disorder causes changes in behavior, energy levels, and activity levels. Bipolar disorder used to be called other names, including manic depression and manic-depressive disorder. What are the types of bipolar disorder? There are three main types of bipolar disorder: Bipolar I disorder involves manic episodes that last at least 7 days or manic symptoms so severe that you need immediate hospital care. Depressive episodes are also common. Those often last at least two weeks. This type of bipolar disorder can also involve mixed episodes. Bipolar II disorder involves depressive episodes. But instead of full-blown manic episodes, there are episodes of hypomania. Hypomania is a less severe version of mania. Cyclothymic disorder , or cyclothymia, also involves hypomanic and depressive symptoms. But they are not as intense or as long-lasting as hypomanic or depressive episodes. The symptoms usually last for at least two years in adults and for one year in children and teenagers. With any of these types, having four or more episodes of mania or depression in a year is called "rapid cycling." What causes bipolar disorder? The exact cause of bipolar disorder is unknown. Several factors likely play a role in the disorder. They include genetics , brain structure and function, and your environment. Who is at risk for bipolar disorder? You are at higher risk for bipolar disorder if you have a close relative who has it. Going through trauma or stressful life events may raise this risk even more. What are the symptoms of bipolar disorder? The symptoms of bipolar disorder can vary. But they involve mood swings known as mood episodes: The symptoms of a manic episode can include Feeling very up, high, or elated Feeling jumpy or wired, more active than usual Having a very short temper or seeming extremely irritable Having racing thoughts and talking very fast Needing less sleep Feeling like you are unusually important, talented, or powerful Do risky things that show poor judgment, such as eating and drinking too much, spending or giving away a lot of money, or having reckless sex The symptoms of a depressive episode can include Feeling very sad, hopeless, or worthless Feeling lonely or isolating yourself from others Talking very slowly, feeling like you have nothing to say, or forgetting a lot Having little energy Sleeping too much Eating too much or too little Lack of interest in your usual activities and being unable to do even simple things Thinking about death or suicide The symptoms of a mixed episode include both manic and depressive symptoms together. For example, you may feel very sad, empty, or hopeless, while at the same time feeling extremely energized. Some people with bipolar disorder may have milder symptoms. For example, you may have hypomania instead of mania. With hypomania, you may feel very good and find that you can get a lot done. You may not feel like anything is wrong. But your family and friends may notice your mood swings and changes in activity levels. They may realize that your behavior is unusual for you. After the hypomania, you might have severe depression. Your mood episodes may last a week or two or sometimes longer. During an episode, symptoms usually occur every day for most of the day. How is bipolar disorder diagnosed? To diagnose bipolar disorder, your health care provider may use many tools: A physical exam A medical history, which will include asking about your symptoms, lifetime history, experiences, and family history Medical tests to rule out other conditions A mental health evaluation. Your provider may do the evaluation or may refer you to a mental health specialist to get one. What are the treatments for bipolar disorder? Treatment can help many people, including those with the most severe forms of bipolar disorder. The main treatments for bipolar disorder include medicines, psychotherapy, or both: Medicines can help control the symptoms of bipolar disorder. You may need to try several different medicines to find which one works best for you. Some people need to take more than one medicine. It's important to take your medicine consistently. Don't stop taking it without first talking with your provider.  Contact your provider if you have any concerns about side effects from the medicines. Psychotherapy (talk therapy) can help you recognize and change troubling emotions, thoughts, and behaviors. It can give you and your family support, education, skills, and coping strategies. There are several different types of psychotherapy that may help with bipolar disorder. Other treatment options include Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), a brain stimulation procedure that can help relieve symptoms. ECT is most often used for severe bipolar disorder that is not getting better with other treatments. It may also be used when someone needs a treatment that will work more quickly than medicines. This might be when a person has a high risk of suicide or is catatonic (unresponsive). Getting regular aerobic exercise may help with depression , anxiety , and trouble sleeping Keeping a life chart can help you and your provider track and treat your bipolar disorder. A life chart is a record of your daily mood symptoms, treatments, sleep patterns, and life events. Bipolar disorder is a lifelong illness. But long-term, ongoing treatment can help manage your symptoms and enable you to live a healthy, successful life. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Most people feel sad or irritable from time to time. They may say they're in a bad mood. A mood disorder is different. It affects a person's everyday emotional state. Nearly one in ten people aged 18 and older have mood disorders. These include depression and bipolar disorder (also called manic depression). Mood disorders can increase a person's risk for heart disease, diabetes, and other diseases. Treatments include medication, psychotherapy, or a combination of both. With treatment, most people with mood disorders can lead productive lives.

What are eating disorders? Eating disorders are serious mental health disorders. They involve severe problems with your thoughts about food and your eating behaviors. You may eat much less or much more than you need. Eating disorders are medical conditions; they are not a lifestyle choice. They affect your body's ability to get proper nutrition. This can lead to health issues, such as heart and kidney problems, or sometimes even death. But there are treatments that can help. What are the types of eating disorders? Common types of eating disorders include: Binge-eating , which is out-of-control eating. People with binge-eating disorder keep eating even after they are full. They often eat until they feel very uncomfortable. Afterward, they usually have feelings of guilt, shame, and distress. Eating too much too often can lead to weight gain and obesity . Binge-eating disorder is the most common eating disorder in the U.S. Bulimia nervosa. People with bulimia nervosa also have periods of binge-eating. But afterwards, they purge, by making themselves throw up or using laxatives. They may also over-exercise or fast. People with bulimia nervosa may be slightly underweight, normal weight, or overweight. Anorexia nervosa. People with anorexia nervosa avoid food, severely restrict food, or eat very small quantities of only certain foods. They may see themselves as overweight, even when they are dangerously underweight. Anorexia nervosa is the least common of the three eating disorders, but it is often the most serious. It has the highest death rate of any mental disorder. What causes eating disorders? The exact cause of eating disorders is unknown. Researchers believe that eating disorders are caused by a complex interaction of factors. These include genetic, biological, behavioral, psychological, and social factors. Who is at risk for eating disorders? Anyone can develop an eating disorder, but they are more common in women. Eating disorders frequently appear during the teen years or young adulthood. But people can also develop them during childhood or later in life. What are the symptoms of eating disorders? The symptoms of eating disorders vary, depending on the disorder: The symptoms of binge-eating include: Eating unusually large amounts of food in a specific amount of time, such as a 2-hour period Eating even when you're full or not hungry Eating fast during binge episodes Eating until you're uncomfortably full Eating alone or in secret to avoid embarrassment Feeling distressed, ashamed, or guilty about your eating Frequently dieting, possibly without weight loss The symptoms of bulimia nervosa include the same symptoms as binge-eating, plus trying to get rid of the food or weight after binging by: Purging, making yourself throw up or using laxatives or enemas to speed up the movement of food through your body Doing intensive and excessive exercise Fasting Over time, bulimia nervosa can cause health problems such as: Chronically inflamed and sore throat Swollen salivary glands in the neck and jaw area Worn tooth enamel and increasingly sensitive and decaying teeth . This is caused by the exposure to stomach acid every time you throw up. GERD (acid reflux) and other gastrointestinal problems Severe dehydration from purging Electrolyte imbalance , which could be too low or too high levels of sodium, calcium, potassium and other minerals. This can lead to a stroke or heart attack . The symptoms of anorexia nervosa include: Eating very little, to the point of starving yourself Intensive and excessive exercise Extreme thinness Intense fear of gaining weight Distorted body image - seeing yourself as overweight even when you are severely underweight Over time, anorexia nervosa can cause health problems such as: Thinning of the bones (osteopenia or osteoporosis ) Mild anemia Muscle wasting and weakness Thin, brittle hair and nails Dry, blotchy, or yellowish skin Growth of fine hair all over the body Severe constipation Low blood pressure Slowed breathing and pulse Feeling cold all the time because of a drop in internal body temperature Feeling faint, dizzy , or weak Feeling tired all the time Infertility Damage to the structure and function of the heart Brain damage Multiorgan failure Anorexia nervosa can be fatal. Some people with this disorder die of complications from starvation, and others die of suicide . Some people with eating disorders may also have other mental disorders (such as depression or anxiety ) or problems with substance use . How is eating disorders diagnosed? Because eating disorders can be so serious, it is important to seek help if you or a loved one thinks that you might have a problem. Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms. It is important to be honest about your eating and exercise behaviors so your provider can help you. A physical exam Blood or urine tests to rule out other possible causes of your symptoms Other tests to see whether you have any other health problems caused by the eating disorder. These can include kidney function tests and an electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG). What are the treatments for eating disorders? Treatment plans for eating disorders are tailored to individual needs. You will likely have a team of providers helping you, including doctors, nutritionists, nurses, and therapists. The treatments may include: Individual, group, and/or family psychotherapy. Individual therapy may include cognitive behavioral approaches, which help you to identify and change negative and unhelpful thoughts. It also helps you build coping skills and change behavioral patterns. Medical care and monitoring, including care for the complications that eating disorders can cause Nutrition counseling. Doctors, nurses, and counselors will help you eat healthy to reach and maintain a healthy weight. Medicines, such as antidepressants , antipsychotics, or mood stabilizers, may help treat some eating disorders. The medicines can also help with the depression and anxiety symptoms that often go along with eating disorders. Some people with serious eating disorders may need to be in a hospital or in a residential treatment program. Residential treatment programs combine housing and treatment services. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Personality disorders are a group of mental illnesses. They involve long-term patterns of thoughts and behaviors that are unhealthy and inflexible. The behaviors cause serious problems with relationships and work.  People with personality disorders have trouble dealing with everyday stresses and problems.  They often have stormy relationships with other people. The cause of personality disorders is unknown. However, genes and childhood experiences may play a role. The symptoms of each personality disorder are different. They can mild or severe.  People with personality disorders may have trouble realizing that they have a problem. To them, their thoughts are normal, and they often blame others for their problems. They may try to get help because of their problems with relationships and work.  Treatment usually includes talk therapy and sometimes medicine.



Psychotic disorders are severe mental disorders that cause abnormal thinking and perceptions. People with psychoses lose touch with reality. Two of the main symptoms are delusions and hallucinations. Delusions are false beliefs, such as thinking that someone is plotting against you or that the TV is sending you secret messages. Hallucinations are false perceptions, such as hearing, seeing, or feeling something that is not there. Schizophrenia is one type of psychotic disorder. People with bipolar disorder may also have psychotic symptoms. Other problems that can cause psychosis include alcohol and some drugs, brain tumors, brain infections, and stroke. Treatment depends on the cause of the psychosis. It might involve drugs to control symptoms and talk therapy. Hospitalization is an option for serious cases where a person might be dangerous to himself or others.

Schizophrenia is a serious brain illness. People who have it may hear voices that aren't there. They may think other people are trying to hurt them. Sometimes they don't make sense when they talk. The disorder makes it hard for them to keep a job or take care of themselves. Symptoms of schizophrenia usually start between ages 16 and 30. Men often develop symptoms at a younger age than women. People usually do not get schizophrenia after age 45. There are three types of symptoms: Psychotic symptoms distort a person's thinking.  These include hallucinations (hearing or seeing things that are not there), delusions (beliefs that are not true), trouble organizing thoughts, and strange movements. "Negative" symptoms make it difficult to show emotions and to function normally. A person may seem depressed and withdrawn. Cognitive symptoms affect the thought process.  These include trouble using information, making decisions, and paying attention. No one is sure what causes schizophrenia.  Your genes, environment, and brain chemistry may play a role. There is no cure. Medicine can help control many of the symptoms. You may need to try different medicines to see which works best. You should stay on your medicine for as long as your doctor recommends. Additional treatments can help you deal with your illness from day to day.  These include therapy, family education, rehabilitation, and skills training. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is traumatic brain injury (TBI)? Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a sudden injury that causes damage to the brain. It may happen when there is a blow, bump, or jolt to the head. This is a closed head injury. A TBI can also happen when an object penetrates the skull. This is a penetrating injury. Symptoms of a TBI can be mild, moderate, or severe. Concussions are a type of mild TBI. The effects of a concussion can sometimes be serious, but most people completely recover in time. More severe TBI can lead to serious physical and psychological symptoms, coma , and even death. What causes traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The main causes of TBI depend on the type of head injury : Some of the common causes of a closed head injury include Falls . This is the most common cause in adults age 65 and older. Motor vehicle crashes. This is the most common cause in young adults. Sports injuries Being struck by an object Child abuse . This is the most common cause in children under age 4. Blast injuries due to explosions Some of the common causes of a penetrating injury include Being hit by a bullet or shrapnel Being hit by a weapon such as a hammer, knife, or baseball bat A head injury that causes a bone fragment to penetrate the skull Some accidents such as explosions, natural disasters, or other extreme events can cause both closed and penetrating TBI in the same person. Who is at risk for traumatic brain injury (TBI)? Certain groups are at higher risk of TBI: Men are more likely to get a TBI than women. They are also more likely to have serious TBI. Adults aged 65 and older are at the greatest risk for being hospitalized and dying from a TBI What are the symptoms of traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The symptoms of TBI depend on the type of injury and how serious the brain damage is. The symptoms of mild TBI can include: A brief loss of consciousness in some cases. However, many people with mild TBI remain conscious after the injury. Headache Confusion Lightheadedness Dizziness Blurred vision or tired eyes Ringing in the ears Bad taste in the mouth Fatigue or lethargy A change in sleep patterns Behavioral or mood changes Trouble with memory, concentration, attention, or thinking If you have a moderate or severe TBI, you may have those same symptoms. You may also have other symptoms such as: A headache that gets worse or does not go away Repeated vomiting or nausea Convulsions or seizures Not being able to wake up from sleep Larger than normal pupil (dark center) of one or both eyes. This is called dilation of the pupil. Slurred speech Weakness or numbness in the arms and legs Loss of coordination Increased confusion, restlessness, or agitation How is traumatic brain injury (TBI) diagnosed? If you have a head injury or other trauma that may have caused a TBI, you need to get medical care as soon as possible. To make a diagnosis, your health care provider: Will ask about your symptoms and the details of your injury Will do a neurologic exam May do imaging tests , such as a CT scan or MRI May use a tool such as the Glasgow coma scale to determine how severe the TBI is. This scale measures your ability to open your eyes, speak, and move. May do neuropsychological tests to check how your brain is functioning What are the treatments for traumatic brain injury (TBI)? The treatments for TBI depend on many factors, including the size, severity, and location of the brain injury. For mild TBI , the main treatment is rest. If you have a headache, you can try taking over-the-counter pain relievers . It is important to follow your health care provider's instructions for complete rest and a gradual return to your normal activities. If you start doing too much too soon, it may take longer to recover. Contact your provider if your symptoms are not getting better or if you have new symptoms. For moderate to severe TBI , the first thing health care providers will do is stabilize you to prevent further injury. They will manage your blood pressure, check the pressure inside your skull, and make sure that there is enough blood and oxygen getting to your brain. Once you are stable, the treatments may include: Surgery to reduce additional damage to your brain, for example to Remove hematomas (clotted blood) Get rid of damaged or dead brain tissue Repair skull fractures Relieve pressure in the skull Medicines to treat the symptoms of TBI and to lower some of the risks associated with it, such as Anti-anxiety medication to lessen feelings of nervousness and fear Anticoagulants to prevent blood clots Anticonvulsants to prevent seizures Antidepressants to treat symptoms of depression and mood instability Muscle relaxants to reduce muscle spasms Stimulants to increase alertness and attention Rehabilitation therapies , which can include therapies for physical, emotional, and cognitive difficulties: Physical therapy, to build physical strength, coordination, and flexibility Occupational therapy, to help you learn or relearn how to perform daily tasks, such as getting dressed, cooking, and bathing Speech therapy, to help you to with speech and other communication skills and treat swallowing disorders Psychological counseling, to help you learn coping skills, work on relationships, and improve your emotional well-being Vocational counseling, which focuses on your ability to return to work and deal with workplace challenges Cognitive therapy, to improve your memory, attention, perception, learning, planning, and judgment Some people with TBI may have permanent disabilities . A TBI can also put you at risk for other health problems such as anxiety , depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder . Treating these problems can improve your quality of life. Can traumatic brain injury (TBI) be prevented? There are steps you can take to prevent head injuries and TBIs: Always wear your seatbelt and use car seats and booster seats for children Never drive under the influence of drugs or alcohol Wear a properly fitting helmet when riding a bicycle, skateboarding, and playing sports like hockey and football Prevent falls by Making your house safer. For example, you can install railings on the stairs and grab bars in the tub, get rid of tripping hazards, and use window guards and stair safety gates for young children. Improving your balance and strength with regular physical activity

During pregnancy , some common infections like the common cold or a skin infection do not usually cause serious problems. But other infections can be dangerous to you, your baby, or both. Some infections may lead to preterm birth and low birth weight babies . Others can cause serious illness, birth defects , and lifelong disabilities, such as hearing loss or learning problems . Some of the infections that can be dangerous during pregnancy include: Bacterial vaginosis (BV) Group B strep (GBS) Hepatitis Sexually transmitted diseases Toxoplasmosis Urinary tract infections Yeast infections Zika virus To try to prevent infections,: Don't eat raw or undercooked meat Don't share food or drinks with other people Wash your hands frequently Don't empty cat litter. Cats can transmit toxoplasmosis. If you do get an infection during pregnancy, contact your health care provider about how best to protect you and your baby. Only some medicines are safe during pregnancy .

What are reproductive hazards? Reproductive hazards are substances that affect the reproductive health of men or women. They also include substances that affect the ability of couples to have healthy children. These substances may be chemical, physical, or biological. Some common types include: Alcohol Chemicals such as pesticides Smoking Legal and illegal drugs Metals such as lead and mercury Radiation Some viruses You may be exposed to reproductive hazards through contact with your skin, breathing them in, or swallowing them. This can happen anywhere, but it is more common in the workplace or at home. What are the health effects of reproductive hazards? The possible health effects of reproductive hazards include infertility , miscarriage , birth defects , and developmental disabilities in children. What type of health effects they cause and how serious they are depends on many factors, including: What the substance is How much of it you are exposed to How it enters your body How long or how often you are exposed How you react to the substance How can reproductive hazards affect men? For a man, a reproductive hazard can affect the sperm. A hazard may cause a problem with the number of sperm, their shape, or the way that they swim. It could also damage the sperm's DNA. Then the sperm may not be able to fertilize an egg. Or it could cause problems with the development of the fetus . How can reproductive hazards affect women? For a woman, a reproductive hazard can disrupt the menstrual cycle . It can cause hormone imbalance, which can raise the risk of diseases such as osteoporosis , heart disease , and certain cancers. It can affect a woman's ability to get pregnant . A woman who is exposed during pregnancy can have different effects, depending on when she was exposed. During the first 3 months of pregnancy, it might cause a birth defect or a miscarriage. During the last 6 months of pregnancy, it could slow the growth of the fetus, affect the development of its brain, or cause preterm labor . How can reproductive hazards be avoided? To try to avoid reproductive hazards,: Avoid alcohol and illegal drugs during pregnancy If you smoke, try to quit . And if you are not a smoker, don't start Take precautions if you are using household chemicals or pesticides Use good hygiene , including handwashing If there are hazards at your job , make sure to follow safe work practices and procedures

If you are like many Americans, you drink alcohol at least occasionally. For many people, moderate drinking is probably safe. But drinking less is better for your health than drinking more. And there are some people who should not drink at all. Because drinking too much can be harmful, it's important to know how alcohol affects you and how much is too much. How does alcohol affect the body? Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant. This means that it is a drug that slows down brain activity. It can change your mood, behavior, and self-control. It can cause problems with memory and thinking clearly. Alcohol can also affect your coordination and physical control. Alcohol also has effects on the other organs in your body. For example, it can raise your blood pressure and heart rate. If you drink too much at once, it could make you throw up. Why are the effects of alcohol different from person to person? Alcohol's effects vary from person to person, depending on a variety of factors, including: How much you drank How quickly you drank it The amount of food you ate before drinking Your age Your sex Your race or ethnicity Your physical condition Whether or not you have a family history of alcohol problems What is moderate drinking? For most women, moderate drinking is no more than one standard drink a day For most men, moderate drinking is no more than two standard drinks a day Even though moderate drinking may be safe for many people, there are still risks. Moderate drinking can raise the risk of death from certain cancers and heart diseases. What is a standard drink? In the United States, a standard drink is one that contains about 14 grams of pure alcohol, which is found in: 12 ounces of beer (5% alcohol content) 5 ounces of wine (12% alcohol content) 1.5 ounces or a "shot" of distilled spirits or liquor (40% alcohol content) Who should not drink alcohol? Some people should not drink alcohol at all, including those who: Are recovering from an alcohol use disorder (AUD) or are unable to control the amount they drink Are under age 21 Are pregnant or trying to become pregnant Are taking medicines that can interact with alcohol Have medical conditions that get can worse if you drink alcohol Are planning on driving Will be operating machinery If you have questions about whether it is safe for you to drink, talk with your health care provider. What is excessive drinking? Excessive drinking includes binge drinking and heavy alcohol use: Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more. For a man, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For a woman, it is after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Heavy alcohol use is having having more than 4 drinks on any day for men or more than 3 drinks for women Binge drinking raises your risk of injuries, car crashes, and alcohol poisoning. It also puts you of becoming violent or being the victim of violence. Heavy alcohol use over a long period of time may cause health problems such as: Alcohol use disorder Liver diseases , including cirrhosis and fatty liver disease Heart diseases Increased risk for certain cancers Increased risk of injuries Heavy alcohol use can also cause problems at home, at work, and with friends. But treatment can help. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

What are drugs? Drugs are chemical substances that can change how your body and mind work. They include prescription medicines, over-the-counter medicines , alcohol , tobacco , and illegal drugs. What is drug use? Drug use, or misuse, includes: Using illegal substances, such as Anabolic steroids Club drugs Cocaine Heroin Inhalants Marijuana Methamphetamines Misusing prescription medicines , including opioids . This means taking the medicines in a different way than the health care provider prescribed. This includes Taking a medicine that was prescribed for someone else Taking a larger dose than you are supposed to Using the medicine in a different way than you are supposed to. For example, instead of swallowing your tablets, you might crush and then snort or inject them. Using the medicine for another purpose, such as getting high Misusing over-the-counter medicines, including using them for another purpose and using them in a different way than you are supposed to Drug use is dangerous. It can harm your brain and body, sometimes permanently. It can hurt the people around you, including friends, families, kids, and unborn babies . Drug use can also lead to addiction. What is drug addiction? Drug addiction is a chronic brain disease. It causes a person to take drugs repeatedly, despite the harm they cause. Repeated drug use can change the brain and lead to addiction. The brain changes from addiction can be lasting, so drug addiction is considered a "relapsing" disease. This means that people in recovery are at risk for taking drugs again, even after years of not taking them. Does everyone who takes drugs become addicted? Not everyone who uses drugs becomes addicted. Everyone's bodies and brains are different, so their reactions to drugs can also be different. Some people may become addicted quickly, or it may happen over time. Other people never become addicted. Whether or not someone becomes addicted depends on many factors. They include genetic, environmental, and developmental factors. Who is at risk for drug addiction? Various risk factors can make you more likely to become addicted to drugs, including: Your biology. People can react to drugs differently. Some people like the feeling the first time they try a drug and want more. Others hate how it feels and never try it again. Mental health problems. People who have untreated mental health problems , such as depression , anxiety , or attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) are more likely to become addicted. This can happen because drug use and mental health problems affect the same parts of the brain. Also, people with these problems may use drugs to try to feel better. Trouble at home. If your home is an unhappy place or was when you were growing up, you might be more likely to have a drug problem. Trouble in school, at work, or with making friends. You might use drugs to get your mind off these problems. Hanging around other people who use drugs. They might encourage you to try drugs. Starting drug use when you're young. When kids use drugs, it affects how their bodies and brains finish growing. This increases your chances of becoming addicted when you're an adult. What are the signs that someone has a drug problem? Signs that someone has a drug problem include: Changing friends a lot Spending a lot of time alone Losing interest in favorite things Not taking care of themselves - for example, not taking showers, changing clothes, or brushing their teeth Being really tired and sad Eating more or eating less than usual Being very energetic, talking fast, or saying things that don't make sense Being in a bad mood Quickly changing between feeling bad and feeling good Sleeping at strange hours Missing important appointments Having problems at work or at school Having problems in personal or family relationships What are the treatments for drug addiction? Treatments for drug addiction include counseling, medicines, or both. Research shows that combining medicines with counseling gives most people the best chance of success. The counseling may be individual, family, and/or group therapy. It can help you: Understand why you got addicted See how drugs changed your behavior Learn how to deal with your problems so you won't go back to using drugs Learn to avoid places, people, and situations where you might be tempted to use drugs Medicines can help with the symptoms of withdrawal. For addiction to certain drugs, there are also medicines that can help you re-establish normal brain function and decrease your cravings. If you have a mental disorder along with an addiction, it is known as a dual diagnosis . It is important to treat both problems. This will increase your chance of success. If you have a severe addiction, you may need hospital-based or residential treatment. Residential treatment programs combine housing and treatment services. Can drug use and addiction be prevented? Drug use and addiction are preventable. Prevention programs involving families, schools, communities, and the media may prevent or reduce drug use and addiction. These programs include education and outreach to help people understand the risks of drug use. NIH: National Institute on Drug Abuse

What is a mental health screening? A mental health screening is an exam of your emotional health. It helps find out if you have a mental disorder . Mental disorders are common. They affect more than half of all Americans at some point in their lives. There are many types of mental disorders. Some of the most common disorders include: Depression and mood disorders. These mental disorders are different than normal sadness or grief. They can cause extreme sadness, anger, and/or frustration. Anxiety disorders. Anxiety can cause excessive worry or fear at real or imagined situations. Eating disorders . These disorders cause obsessive thoughts and behaviors related to food and body image. Eating disorders may cause people to severely limit the amount of food they eat, excessively overeat (binge), or do a combination of both. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) . ADHD is one of the most common mental disorders in children. It can also continue into adulthood. People with ADHD have trouble paying attention and controlling impulsive behavior. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) . This disorder can happen after you live through a traumatic life event, such as a war or serious accident. People with PTSD feel stressed and afraid, even long after the danger is over. Substance abuse and addictive disorders. These disorders involve excessive use of alcohol or drugs . People with substance abuse disorders are at risk for overdose and death. Bipolar disorder , formerly called manic depression. People with bipolar disorder have alternating episodes of mania (extreme highs) and depression. Schizophrenia and psychotic disorders . These are among the most serious psychiatric disorders. They can cause people to see, hear, and/or believe things that aren't real. The effects of mental disorders range from mild to severe to life-threatening. Fortunately, many people with mental disorders can be successfully treated with medicine and/or talk therapy. Other names: mental health assessment, mental illness test, psychological evaluation, psychology test, psychiatric evaluation What is it used for? A mental health screening is used to help diagnose mental disorders. Your primary care provider may use a mental health screening to see if you need to go to a mental health provider. A mental health provider is a health care professional that specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health problems. If you are already seeing a mental health provider, you may get a mental health screening to help guide your treatment. Why do I need a mental health screening? You may need a mental health screening if you have symptoms of a mental disorder. Symptoms vary depending on the type of disorder, but common signs may include: Excessive worrying or fear Extreme sadness Major changes in personality, eating habits, and/or sleeping patterns Dramatic mood swings Anger, frustration, or irritability Fatigue and lack of energy Confused thinking and trouble concentrating Feelings of guilt or worthlessness Avoidance of social activities One of the most serious signs of a mental disorder is thinking about or attempting suicide . If you are thinking about hurting yourself or about suicide, seek help right away. There are many ways to get help. You can: Call 911 or your local emergency room Call your mental health provider or other health care provider Reach out to a loved one or close friend Call a suicide hotline. In the United States, you can call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) If you are a veteran, call the Veterans Crisis Line at 1-800-273-8255 or send a text to 838255 What happens during a mental health screening? Your primary care provider may give you a physical exam and ask you about your feelings, mood, behavior patterns, and other symptoms. Your provider may also order a blood test to find out if a physical disorder, such as thyroid disease , may be causing mental health symptoms. During a blood test, a health care professional will take a blood sample from a vein in your arm, using a small needle. After the needle is inserted, a small amount of blood will be collected into a test tube or vial. You may feel a little sting when the needle goes in or out. This usually takes less than five minutes. If you are being tested by a mental health provider, he or she may ask you more detailed questions about your feelings and behaviors. You may also be asked to fill out a questionnaire about these issues. Will I need to do anything to prepare for a mental health screening? You don't need any special preparations for a mental health screening. Are there any risks to screening? There is no risk to having a physical exam or taking a questionnaire. There is very little risk to having a blood test. You may have slight pain or bruising at the spot where the needle was put in, but most symptoms go away quickly. What do the results mean? If you are diagnosed with a mental disorder, it's important to get treatment as soon as possible. Treatment may help prevent long-term suffering and disability. Your specific treatment plan will depend on the type of disorder you have and how serious it is. Is there anything else I need to know about a mental health screening? There are many types of providers who treat mental disorders. The most common types of mental health providers include: Psychiatrist , a medical doctor who specializes in mental health. Psychiatrists diagnose and treat mental health disorders. They can also prescribe medicine. Psychologist , a professional trained in psychology. Psychologists generally have doctoral degrees. But they do not have medical degrees. Psychologists diagnose and treat mental health disorders. They offer one-on-one counseling and/or group therapy sessions. They can't prescribe medicine, unless they have a special license. Some psychologists work with providers who are able to prescribe medicine. Licensed clinical social worker (L.C.S.W.) has a master's degree in social work with training in mental health. Some have additional degrees and training. L.C.S.W.s diagnose and provide counseling for a variety of mental health problems. They can't prescribe medicine, but can work with providers who are able to. Licensed professional counselor. (L.P.C.). Most L.P.C.s have a master's degree. But training requirements vary by state. L.P.C.s diagnose and provide counseling for a variety of mental health problems. They can't prescribe medicine, but can work with providers who are able to. Advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs)are specially trained nurses who have a masters or doctoral degree in psychiatric nursing. They assess, diagnose, and treat a variety of mental health disorders. Some ARPNs can prescribe medicines. C.S.W.s and L.P.C.s may be known by other names, including therapist, clinician, or counselor. If you don't know which type of mental health provider you should see, talk to your primary care provider. References American Psychiatric Nurses Association [Internet]. Falls Church (VA): American Psychiatric Nurses Association; Psychiatric Mental Health Nurses; [cited 2021 Aug 2]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.apna.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3292 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [Internet]. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Learn About Mental Health; [updated 2018 Jan 26; cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/learn Mayo Clinic [Internet]. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; c19982018. Mental health providers: Tips on finding one; 2017 May 16 [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mental-illness/in-depth/mental-health-providers/art-20045530 Mayo Clinic [Internet]. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; c19982018. Mental illness: Diagnosis and treatment; 2015 Oct 13 [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 4 screens]. Available from: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mental-illness/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20374974 Mayo Clinic [Internet]. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; c19982018. Mental illness: Symptoms and causes; 2015 Oct 13 [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mental-illness/symptoms-causes/syc-20374968 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c19952018. Mental Health Assessment: How It Is Done; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 5 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756#tp16780 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c19952018. Mental Health Assessment: Results; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 8 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756#tp16783 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c19952018. Mental Health Assessment: Test Overview; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c19952018. Mental Health Assessment: Why It Is Done; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756#tp16778 Merck Manual Consumer Version [Internet]. Kenilworth (NJ): Merck & Co. Inc.; c2018. Overview of Mental Illness; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/mental-health-disorders/overview-of-mental-health-care/overview-of-mental-illness National Alliance on Mental Illness [Internet]. Arlington (VA): NAMI; c2018. Know the Warning Signs [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Know-the-Warning-Signs National Alliance on Mental Illness [Internet]. Arlington (VA): NAMI; c2018. Mental Health Screening; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Mental-Health-Public-Policy/Mental-Health-Screening National Alliance on Mental Illness [Internet]. Arlington (VA): NAMI; c2018. Types of Mental Health Professionals; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Treatment/Types-of-Mental-Health-Professionals National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Blood Tests; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/blood-tests National Institute of Mental Health [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Eating Disorders; [updated 2016 Feb; cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/eating-disorders/index.shtml National Institute of Mental Health [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Mental Illness; [updated 2017 Nov; cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-illness.shtml University of Rochester Medical Center [Internet]. Rochester (NY): University of Rochester Medical Center; c2018. Health Encyclopedia: Comprehensive Psychiatric Evaluation; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/encyclopedia/content.aspx?contenttypeid=85&contentid=P00752 Show references





Conversion disorder is a mental condition in which a person has blindness, paralysis, or other nervous system (neurologic) symptoms that cannot be explained by medical evaluation.Conversion disorder symptoms may occur because of a psychological conflict. Symptoms usually begin suddenly after a stressful experience. People are at risk of conversion disorder if they also have: A medical illness A dissociative disorder (escape from reality that is not on purpose) A personality disorder (inability to manage feelings and behaviors that are expected in certain social situations) People who have conversion disorder are not making up their symptoms in order to obtain shelter, for example (malingering). They are also not intentionally injuring themselves or lying about their symptoms just to become a patient (factitious disorder). Some health care providers falsely believe that conversion disorder is not a real condition and may tell people that the problem is all in their head. But this condition is real. It causes distress and cannot be turned on and off at will. The physical symptoms are thought to be an attempt to resolve the conflict the person feels inside. For example, a woman who believes it is not acceptable to have violent feelings may suddenly feel numbness in her arms after becoming so angry that she wanted to hit someone. Instead of allowing herself to have violent thoughts about hitting someone, she experiences the physical symptom of numbness in her arms.

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) uses an electric current to treat depression and some other mental illnesses.During ECT, the electric current triggers a seizure in the brain. Doctors believe that the seizure activity may help the brain "rewire" itself, which helps relieve symptoms. ECT is generally safe and effective. ECT is most often done in a hospital while you are asleep and pain free ( general anesthesia ): You receive medicine to relax you (muscle relaxant). You also receive another medicine (short-acting anesthetic) to put you briefly to sleep and prevent you from feeling pain. Electrodes are placed on your scalp. Two electrodes monitor your brain activity. Another two electrodes are used to deliver the electric current. When you are asleep, a small amount of electric current is delivered to your head to cause seizure activity in the brain. It lasts for about 40 seconds. You receive medicine to prevent the seizure from spreading throughout your body. As a result, your hands or feet move only slightly during the procedure. ECT is usually given once every 2 to 5 days for a total of 6 to 12 sessions. Sometimes more sessions are needed. Several minutes after the treatment, you wake up. You DO NOT remember the treatment. You are taken to a recovery area. There, the health care team monitors you closely. When you have recovered, you can go home. You need to have an adult drive you home. Be sure to arrange this ahead of time.

Illness anxiety disorder (IAD) is a preoccupation that physical symptoms are signs of a serious illness, even when there is no medical evidence to support the presence of an illness.People with IAD are overly focused on, and always thinking about, their physical health. They have an unrealistic fear of having or developing a serious disease. This disorder occurs equally in men and women. The way people with IAD think about their physical symptoms can make them more likely to have this condition. As they focus on and worry about physical sensations, a cycle of symptoms and worry begins, which can be hard to stop. It is important to realize that people with IAD do not purposely create these symptoms. They aren't able to control the symptoms. People who have a history of physical or sexual abuse are more likely to have IAD. But this doesn't mean that everyone with IAD has a history of abuse.

Munchausen syndrome by proxy is a mental illness and a form of child abuse . The caretaker of a child, most often a mother, either makes up fake symptoms or causes real symptoms to make it look like the child is sick.No one is sure what causes Munchausen syndrome by proxy. Sometimes, the person was abused as a child or has Munchausen syndrome (fake illness for themselves).

Somatic symptom disorder (SSD) occurs when a person feels extreme, exaggerated anxiety about physical symptoms. The person has such intense thoughts, feelings, and behaviors related to the symptoms, that they feel they cannot do some of the activities of daily life. They may believe routine medical problems are life threatening. This anxiety may not improve despite normal test results and reassurance from the health care provider. A person with SSD is not faking their symptoms. The pain and other problems are real. They may be caused by a medical problem. Often, no physical cause can be found. However, it is the extreme reaction and behaviors about the symptoms that are the main problem.SSD usually begins before age 30. It occurs more often in women than in men. It's not clear why some people develop this condition. Certain factors may be involved: Having a negative outlook Being more physically and emotionally sensitive to pain and other sensations Family history or upbringing Genetics People who have a history of physical or sexual abuse may be more likely to have this disorder. But not everyone with SSD has a history of abuse. SSD is similar to illness anxiety disorder (hypochondria). This is when people are overly anxious about becoming sick or developing a serious disease. They fully expect they will become very ill at some point. Unlike SSD, with illness anxiety disorder, there are few or no actual physical symptoms.





It's important to recognize and treat mental illnesses in children early on.  Once mental illness develops, it becomes a regular part of your child's behavior. This makes it more difficult to treat. But it's not always easy to know when your child has a serious problem. Everyday stresses can cause changes in your child's behavior. For example, getting a new brother or sister or going to a new school may cause a child to temporarily act out. Warning signs that it might be a more serious problem include: Problems in more than one setting (at school, at home, with peers) Changes in appetite or sleep Social withdrawal or fear of things he or she did not used to be not afraid of Returning to behaviors more common in younger children, such as bedwetting Signs of being upset, such as sadness or tearfulness Signs of self-destructive behavior, such as head-banging or suddenly getting hurt often Repeated thoughts of death To diagnose mental health problems, the doctor or mental health specialist looks at your child's signs and symptoms, medical history, and family history. Treatments include medicines and talk therapy. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Many people enjoy gambling, whether it's betting on a horse or playing poker on the Internet. Most people who gamble don't have a problem, but some lose control of their gambling. Signs of problem gambling include : Always thinking about gambling Lying about gambling Spending work or family time gambling Feeling bad after you gamble, but not quitting Gambling with money you need for other things If you have concerns about your gambling, ask for help. Your health care provider can work with you to find the treatment that's best for you. NIH: National Institutes of Health

What is delirium? Delirium is a mental state in which you are confused, disoriented, and not able to think or remember clearly. It usually starts suddenly. It is often temporary and treatable. There are three types of delirium: Hypoactive, where you are not active and seem sleepy, tired, or depressed Hyperactive, where you are restless or agitated Mixed, where you change back and forth between being hypoactive and hyperactive What causes delirium? There are many different problems that can cause delirium. Some of the more common causes include: Alcohol or drugs , either from intoxication or withdrawal. This includes a serious type of alcohol withdrawal syndrome called delirium tremens. It usually happens to people who stop drinking after years of alcohol abuse. Dehydration and electrolyte imbalances Dementia Hospitalization , especially in intensive care Infections , such as urinary tract infections , pneumonia , and the flu Medicines. This could be a side effect of a medicine, such as sedatives or opioids. Or it could be withdrawal after stopping a medicine. Metabolic disorders Organ failure , such as kidney or liver failure Poisoning Serious illnesses Severe pain Sleep deprivation Surgeries , including reactions to anesthesia Who is at risk for delirium? Certain factors put you at risk for delirium, including: Being in a hospital or nursing home Dementia Having a serious illness or more than one illness Having an infection Older age Surgery Taking medicines that affect the mind or behavior Taking high doses of pain medicines , such as opioids What are the symptoms of delirium? The symptoms of delirium usually start suddenly, over a few hours or a few days. They often come and go. The most common symptoms include: Changes in alertness (usually more alert in the morning, less at night) Changing levels of consciousness Confusion Disorganized thinking, talking in a way that doesn't make sense Disrupted sleep patterns, sleepiness Emotional changes: anger, agitation, depression , irritability, overexcitement Hallucinations and delusions Incontinence Memory problems, especially with short-term memory Trouble concentrating How is delirium diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms Physical and neurological exams Mental status testing Lab and diagnostic imaging tests Delirium and dementia have similar symptoms, so it can be hard to tell them apart. They can also occur together. Delirium starts suddenly and can cause hallucinations. The symptoms may get better or worse and can last for hours or weeks.  On the other hand, dementia develops slowly and does not cause hallucinations. The symptoms are stable and may last for months or years. What are the treatments for delirium? Treatment of delirium focuses on the causes and symptoms of delirium. The first step is to identify the cause. Often, treating the cause will lead to a full recovery. The recovery may take some time - weeks or sometimes even months. In the meantime, there may be treatments to manage the symptoms, such as: Controlling the environment, which includes making sure that the room is quiet and well-lit, having clocks or calendars in view, and having family members around Medicines, including those that control aggression or agitation and pain relievers if there is pain If needed, making sure that the person has a hearing aid, glasses, or other devices for communication Can delirium be prevented? Treating the conditions that can cause delirium may reduce the risk of getting it. Hospitals can help lower the risk of delirium by avoiding sedatives and making sure that the room is kept quiet, calm, and well-lit. It can also help to have family members around and to have the same staff members treat the person.























What is self-harm? Self-harm, or self-injury, is when a person hurts his or her own body on purpose. The injuries may be minor, but sometimes they can be severe. They may leave permanent scars or cause serious health problems. Some examples are: Cutting yourself (such as using a razor blade, knife, or other sharp object to cut your skin) Punching yourself or punching things (like a wall) Burning yourself with cigarettes, matches, or candles Pulling out your hair Poking objects through body openings Breaking your bones or bruising yourself Self-harm is not a mental disorder. It is a behavior - an unhealthy way to cope with strong feelings. However, some of the people who harm themselves do have a mental disorder . People who harm themselves are usually not trying to kill themselves .  But they are at higher risk of attempting suicide if they do not get help. Why do people harm themselves? There are different reasons why people harm themselves. Often, they have trouble coping and dealing with their feelings. They harm themselves to try to: Make themselves feel something, when they feel empty or numb inside Block upsetting memories Show that they need help Release strong feelings that overwhelm them, such as anger, loneliness, or hopelessness Punish themselves Feel a sense of control Who is at risk for self-harm? There are people of all ages who harm themselves, but it usually starts in the teen or early adult years. Self-harm is more common in people who: Were abused or went through a trauma as children Have mental disorders, such as Depression Eating disorders Post-traumatic stress disorder Certain personality disorders Misuse drugs or alcohol Have friends who self-harm Have low self-esteem What are the signs of self-harm? Signs that someone may be hurting themselves include: Having frequent cuts, bruises, or scars Wearing long sleeves or pants even in hot weather Making excuses about injuries Having sharp objects around for no clear reason How can I help someone who self-harms? If someone you know is self-harming, it is important not to be judgmental. Let that person know that you want to help. If the person is a child or teenager, ask him or her to talk to a trusted adult. If he or she won't do that, talk to a trusted adult yourself. If the person who is self-harming is an adult, suggest mental health counseling. What the treatments are for self-harm? There are no medicines to treat self-harming behaviors. But there are medicines to treat any mental disorders that the person may have, such as anxiety and depression. Treating the mental disorder may weaken the urge to self-harm. Mental health counseling or therapy can also help by teaching the person: Problem-solving skills New ways to cope with strong emotions Better relationship skills Ways to strengthen self-esteem If the problem is severe, the person may need more intensive treatment in a psychiatric hospital or a mental health day program.

What is suicide? Suicide is the taking of one's own life. It is a death that happens when someone harms themselves because they want to end their life. A suicide attempt is when someone harms themselves to try to end their life, but they do not die. Suicide is a major public health problem and a leading cause of death in the United States. The effects of suicide go beyond the person who acts to take his or her life. It can also have a lasting effect on family, friends, and communities. Who is at risk for suicide? Suicide does not discriminate. It can touch anyone, anywhere, at any time. But there are certain factors that can contribute to the risk of suicide, including: Having attempted suicide before Depression and other mental health disorders Alcohol or drug use disorder Family history of a mental health disorder Family history of an alcohol or drug use disorder Family history of suicide Family violence, including physical or sexual abuse Having guns in the home Being in or having recently gotten out of prison or jail Being exposed to others' suicidal behavior, such as a family member, peer, or celebrity Medical illness, including chronic pain Stressful life event, such as a job loss, financial problems, loss of a loved one, a breakup of a relationship, etc. Being between the ages of 15 and 24 years or over age 60 What are the warning signs for suicide? The warning signs for suicide include: Talking about wanting to die or wanting to kill oneself Making a plan or looking for a way to kill oneself, such as searching online Buying a gun or stockpiling pills Feeling empty, hopeless, trapped, or like there's no reason to live Being in unbearable pain Talking about being a burden to others Using more alcohol or drugs Acting anxious or agitated; behaving recklessly Sleeping too little or too much Withdrawing from family or friends or feeling isolated Showing rage or talking about seeking revenge Displaying extreme mood swings Saying good-bye to loved ones, putting affairs in order Some people may tell others about their suicidal thoughts. But others may try to hide them. This can make some of the signs harder to spot. What should I do if I need help or know someone who does? If you or someone you know has the warning signs for suicide, get help right away , especially if there is a change in behavior. If it is an emergency, dial 911. Otherwise there are five steps that you can take: Ask the person if they're thinking about killing themselves Keep them safe. Find out whether they have a plan for suicide and keep them away from things that they can use to kill themselves. Be there with them. Listen carefully and find out what they are thinking and feeling. Help them connect to resources that can help them, such as Calling the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255). Veterans can call and  press 1 to reach the Veterans Crisis Line. Texting the Crisis Text Line (text HOME to 741741) Texting the Veterans Crisis Line at 838255 Stay connected. Staying in touch after a crisis can make a difference. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Being a teenager is hard. You're under stress to be liked, do well in school, get along with your family, and make big decisions. You can't avoid most of these pressures, and worrying about them is normal. But feeling very sad, hopeless or worthless could be warning signs of a mental health problem. Mental health problems are real, painful, and sometimes severe. You might need help if you have the signs mentioned above, or if you : Often feel very angry or very worried Feel grief for a long time after a loss or death Think your mind is controlled or out of control Use alcohol or drugs Exercise, diet and/or binge-eat obsessively Hurt other people or destroy property Do reckless things that could harm you or others Feel depressed (sad and hopeless) Mental health problems can be treated. To find help, talk to your parents, school counselor, or health care provider.





Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone.  It is one of your endocrine glands, which make hormones.  Thyroid hormones control the rate of many activities in your body. These include how fast you burn calories and how fast your heart beats. All of these activities are your body's metabolism. Thyroid problems include: Goiter - enlargement of the thyroid gland Hyperthyroidism - when your thyroid gland makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs Hypothyroidism - when your thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormones Thyroid cancer Thyroid nodules - lumps in the thyroid gland Thyroiditis - swelling of the thyroid To diagnose thyroid diseases, doctors use a medical history, physical exam, and thyroid tests . They sometimes also use a biopsy. Treatment depends on the problem, but may include medicines, radioiodine therapy, or thyroid surgery. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

What is hyperthyroidism? Hyperthyroidism, or overactive thyroid, happens when your thyroid gland makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs. Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. If not treated, hyperthyroidism can cause serious problems with your heart, bones, muscles, menstrual cycle, and fertility. But there are treatments that can help. What causes hyperthyroidism? Hyperthyroidism has several causes. They include: Grave's disease, an autoimmune disorder in which your immune system attacks your thyroid and causes it to make too much hormone. This is the most common cause. Thyroid nodules, which are growths on your thyroid. They are usually benign (not cancer). But they may become overactive and make too much thyroid hormone. Thyroid nodules are more common in older adults. Thyroiditis, inflammation of the thyroid. It causes stored thyroid hormone to leak out of your thyroid gland. Too much iodine. Iodine is found in some medicines, cough syrups, seaweed and seaweed-based supplements. Taking too much of them can cause your thyroid to make too much thyroid hormone. Too much thyroid medicine. This can happen if people who take thyroid hormone medicine for hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) take too much of it. Who is at risk for hyperthyroidism? You are at higher risk for hyperthyroidism if you: Are a woman Are older than age 60 Have been pregnant or had a baby within the past 6 months Have had thyroid surgery or a thyroid problem, such as goiter Have a family history of thyroid disease Have pernicious anemia , in which the body cannot make enough healthy red blood cells because it does not have enough vitamin B12 Have type 1 diabetes or primary adrenal insufficiency, a hormonal disorder Get too much iodine, from eating large amounts of foods containing iodine or using iodine-containing medicines or supplements What are the symptoms of hyperthyroidism? The symptoms of hyperthyroidism can vary from person to person and may include: Nervousness or irritability Fatigue Muscle weakness Trouble tolerating heat Trouble sleeping Tremor , usually in your hands Rapid and irregular heartbeat Frequent bowel movements or diarrhea Weight loss Mood swings Goiter, an enlarged thyroid that may cause your neck to look swollen. Sometimes it can cause trouble with breathing or swallowing. Adults over age 60 may have different symptoms than younger adults. For example, they may lose their appetite or withdraw from other people. Sometimes this can be mistaken for depression or dementia . What other problems can hyperthyroidism cause? If hyperthyroidism isn't treated, it can cause some serious health problems, including: An irregular heartbeat that can lead to blood clots , stroke , heart failure , and other heart problems An eye disease called Graves' ophthalmopathy. It can cause double vision, light sensitivity, and eye pain. In rare cases, it can lead to vision loss . Thinning bones and osteoporosis Fertility problems in women Complications in pregnancy, such as premature birth , low birth weight , high blood pressure in pregnancy , and miscarriage How is hyperthyroidism diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, including asking about symptoms A physical exam Thyroid tests , such as TSH , T3 , T4 , and thyroid antibody  blood tests Imaging tests , such as a thyroid scan, ultrasound , or radioactive iodine uptake test.  A radioactive iodine uptake test measures how much radioactive iodine your thyroid takes up from your blood after you swallow a small amount of it. What are the treatments for hyperthyroidism? The treatments for hyperthyroidism include medicines, radioiodine therapy, and thyroid surgery: Medicines for hyperthyroidism include Antithyroid medicines, which cause your thyroid to make less thyroid hormone. You probably need to take the medicines for 1 to 2 years. In some cases, you might need to take the medicines for several years. This is the simplest treatment, but it is often not a permanent cure. Beta blocker medicines, which can reduce symptoms such as tremors, rapid heartbeat, and nervousness. They work quickly and can help you feel better until other treatments take effect. Radioiodine therapy is a common and effective treatment for hyperthyroidism. It involves taking radioactive iodine by mouth as a capsule or liquid. This slowly destroys the cells of the thyroid gland that produce thyroid hormone. It does not affect other body tissues. Almost everyone who has radioactive iodine treatment later develops hypothyroidism. This is because the thyroid hormone-producing cells have been destroyed. But hypothyroidism is easier to treat and causes fewer long-term health problems than hyperthyroidism. Surgery to remove part or most of the thyroid gland is done in rare cases. It might be an option for people with large goiters or pregnant women who cannot take antithyroid medicines. If you have all of your thyroid removed, you will need to take thyroid medicines for the rest of your life. Some people who have part of their thyroid removed also need to take medicines. If you have hyperthyroidism, it's important not to get too much iodine. Talk to your health care provider about which foods, supplements, and medicines you need to avoid. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is hypothyroidism? Hypothyroidism, or underactive thyroid, happens when your thyroid gland doesn't make enough thyroid hormones to meet your body's needs. Your thyroid is a small, butterfly-shaped gland in the front of your neck. It makes hormones that control the way the body uses energy. These hormones affect nearly every organ in your body and control many of your body's most important functions. For example, they affect your breathing, heart rate, weight, digestion, and moods. Without enough thyroid hormones, many of your body's functions slow down. But there are treatments that can help. What causes hypothyroidism? Hypothyroidism has several causes. They include: Hashimoto's disease, an autoimmune disorder where your immune system attacks your thyroid. This is the most common cause. Thyroiditis, inflammation of the thyroid Congenital hypothyroidism, hypothyroidism that is present at birth Surgical removal of part or all of the thyroid Radiation treatment of the thyroid Certain medicines In rare cases, a pituitary disease or too much or too little iodine in your diet Who is at risk for hypothyroidism? You are at higher risk for hypothyroidism if you: Are a woman Are older than age 60 Have had a thyroid problem before, such as a goiter Have had surgery to correct a thyroid problem Have received radiation treatment to the thyroid, neck, or chest Have a family history of thyroid disease Were pregnant or had a baby in the past 6 months Have Turner syndrome , a genetic disorder that affects females Have pernicious anemia , in which the body cannot make enough healthy red blood cells because it does not have enough vitamin B12 Have Sjogren's syndrome , a disease that causes dry eyes and mouth Have type 1 diabetes Have rheumatoid arthritis , an autoimmune disease that affects the joints Have lupus , a chronic autoimmune disease What are the symptoms of hypothyroidism? The symptoms of hypothyroidism can vary from person to person and may include: Fatigue Weight gain A puffy face Trouble tolerating cold Joint and muscle pain Constipation Dry skin Dry, thinning hair Decreased sweating Heavy or irregular menstrual periods Fertility problems in women Depression Slowed heart rate Goiter, an enlarged thyroid that may cause your neck to look swollen. Sometimes it can cause trouble with breathing or swallowing. Because hypothyroidism develops slowly, many people don't notice symptoms of the disease for months or even years. What other problems can hypothyroidism cause? Hypothyroidism can contribute to high cholesterol . In rare cases, untreated hypothyroidism can cause myxedema coma. This is a condition in which your body's functions slow down to the point that it becomes life-threatening. During pregnancy, hypothyroidism can cause complications , such as premature birth , high blood pressure in pregnancy , and miscarriage . It can also slow the baby's growth and development . How is hypothyroidism diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, including asking about your symptoms A physical exam Thyroid tests , such as TSH , T3 , T4 , and thyroid antibody  blood tests Imaging tests , such as a thyroid scan, ultrasound , or radioactive iodine uptake test. A radioactive iodine uptake test measures how much radioactive iodine your thyroid takes up from your blood after you swallow a small amount of it. What are the treatments for hypothyroidism? The treatment for hypothyroidism is medicine to replace the hormone that your own thyroid can no longer make. About 6 to 8 weeks after you start taking the medicine, you will get a blood test to check your thyroid hormone level. Your health care provider will adjust your dose if needed. Each time your dose is adjusted, you'll have another blood test. Once you find the right dose, you will probably get a blood test in 6 months. After that, you will need the test once a year. If you take your medicine according to the instructions, you usually should be able to control the hypothyroidism. You should never stop taking your medicine without talking with your health care provider first. If you have Hashimoto's disease or other types of autoimmune thyroid disorders, you may be sensitive to harmful side effects from iodine. Talk to your health care provider about which foods, supplements, and medicines you need to avoid. Women need more iodine when they are pregnant because the baby gets iodine from the mother's diet. If you are pregnant, talk with your health care provider about how much iodine you need. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone.  It makes hormones that help the body work normally. There are several types of cancer of the thyroid gland. You are at greater risk if you: Are between ages 25 and 65 Are a woman Are Asian Have a family member who has had thyroid disease Have had radiation treatments to your head or neck You should see a doctor if you have a lump or swelling in your neck. Doctors use a physical exam, thyroid tests , other blood and imaging tests, and a biopsy to diagnose thyroid cancer. Treatment depends on the type of cancer you have and how far the cancer has spread. Many patients receive a combination of treatments. They may include surgery, radioactive iodine, hormone treatment, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, or targeted therapy. Targeted therapy uses drugs or other substances that attack specific cancer cells with less harm to normal cells. NIH: National Cancer Institute

Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone. It is one of your endocrine glands, which make hormones. Thyroid hormones control the rate of many activities in your body. They include how fast you burn calories and how fast your heart beats. Thyroid tests check how well your thyroid is working. They are also used to diagnose and help find the cause of thyroid diseases such as hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism . Thyroid tests include blood tests and imaging tests. Blood tests for your thyroid include: TSH - measures thyroid-stimulating hormone. It is the most accurate measure of thyroid activity. T3 and T4 - measure different thyroid hormones. TSI - measures thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin. Antithyroid antibody test - measures antibodies (markers in the blood). Imaging tests include CT scans, ultrasound, and nuclear medicine tests. One type of nuclear medicine test is the thyroid scan. It uses small amounts of radioactive material to create a picture of the thyroid, showing its size, shape, and position. It can help find the cause of hyperthyroidism and check for thyroid nodules (lumps in the thyroid). Another nuclear test is the radioactive iodine uptake test, or thyroid uptake test. It checks how well your thyroid is working and can help find the cause of hyperthyroidism. NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases



The ACE test measures the level of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in the blood.A blood sample is needed .

Antithyroglobulin antibody is a test to measure antibodies to a protein called thyroglobulin. This protein is found in thyroid cells.A blood sample is needed.

Microsomes are found inside thyroid cells. The body produces antibodies to microsomes when there has been damage to thyroid cells. The antithyroid microsomal antibody test measures these antibodies in the blood.A blood sample is needed.

Bulging eyes is the abnormal protrusion (bulging out) of one or both eyeballs.Prominent eyes may be a family trait. But prominent eyes are not the same as bulging eyes. Bulging eyes should be checked by a health care provider. Bulging of one eye, especially in a child, can be a very serious sign. It should be checked right away. Hyperthyroidism (particularly Graves disease ) is the most common medical cause of bulging eyes. With this condition, the eyes do not blink often and seem to have a staring quality. Normally, there should be no visible white between the top of the iris (the colored part of the eye) and the upper eyelid. Seeing white in this area most often is a sign that the eye is bulging. Because eye changes most often develop slowly, family members may not notice it until the condition is fairly advanced. Photos often draw attention to the bulging when it may have gone unnoticed before.

Fine needle aspiration of the thyroid gland is a procedure to remove thyroid cells for examination. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland located inside the front of the lower neck.This test may be done in the health care provider's office or in a hospital. Numbing medicine (anesthesia) may or may not be used. Because the needle is very thin, you may not need this medicine. You lie on your back with a pillow under your shoulders with your neck extended. The biopsy site is cleaned. A thin needle is inserted into your thyroid, where it collects a sample of thyroid cells and fluid. The needle is then taken out. If the provider cannot feel the biopsy site, they may use ultrasound or a CT scan to guide where to put the needle. Ultrasound and CT scans are painless procedures that show images inside the body. Pressure is applied to the biopsy site to stop any bleeding. The site is then covered with a bandage.

A simple goiter is an enlargement of the thyroid gland. It is usually not a tumor or cancer.The thyroid gland is an important organ of the endocrine system . It is located at the front of the neck just above where your collarbones meet. The gland makes the hormones that control the way every cell in the body uses energy. This process is called metabolism . Iodine deficiency is the most common cause of goiter. The body needs iodine to produce thyroid hormone. If you do not have enough iodine in your diet, the thyroid gets larger to try and capture all the iodine it can, so it can make the right amount of thyroid hormone. So, a goiter can be a sign the thyroid is not able to make enough thyroid hormone. The use of iodized salt in the United States prevents a lack of iodine in the diet. Other causes of goiter include: The body's immune system attacking the thyroid gland ( autoimmune problem ) Certain medicines (lithium, amiodarone) Infections (rare) Cigarette smoking Eating very large amounts of certain foods (soy, peanuts, or vegetables in the broccoli and cabbage family) Toxic nodular goiter, an enlarged thyroid gland that has a small growth or many growths called nodules, which produce too much thyroid hormone Simple goiters are more common in: People over age 40 People with a family history of goiter People who are born and raised in areas with iodine deficiency Women

Radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) tests thyroid function. It measures how much radioactive iodine is taken up by your thyroid gland in a certain time period. A similar test is the thyroid scan . The 2 tests are commonly performed together, but they can be done separately.The test is done in this way: You are given a pill that contains a tiny amount of radioactive iodine. After swallowing it, you wait as the iodine collects in the thyroid. The first uptake is usually done 4 to 6 hours after you take the iodine pill. Another uptake is usually done 24 hours later. During the uptake, you lie on your back on a table. A device called a gamma probe is moved back and forth over the area of your neck where the thyroid gland is located. The probe detects the location and intensity of the rays given off by the radioactive material. A computer displays how much of the tracer is taken up by the thyroid gland. The test takes less than 30 minutes.

The thyroid gland is normally located at the front of the neck. A retrosternal thyroid refers to the abnormallocation of all or part of the thyroid gland below the breastbone (sternum).A retrosternal goiter is always a consideration in people who have a mass sticking out of the neck. A retrosternal goiter often causes no symptoms for years. It is often detected when a chest x-ray or CT scan is done for another reason. Any symptoms are usually due to pressure on nearby structures, such as the windpipe (trachea) and swallowing tube (esophagus). Surgery to completely remove the goiter may be recommended, even if you do not have symptoms. During the surgery: You receive general anesthesia. This makes you asleep and unable to feel pain. You lie on your back with your neck slightly extended. The surgeon makes a cut (incision) in the front of your lower neck just above the collar bones to determine if the mass can be removed without opening the chest. Most of the time, the surgery can be done this way. If the mass is deep inside the chest, the surgeon makes an incision along the middle of your chest bone. The entire goiter is then removed. A tube may be left in place to drain fluid and blood. It is usually removed in 1 to 2 days. The incisions are closed with stitches (sutures).

Silent thyroiditis is an immune reaction of the thyroid gland. The disorder can cause hyperthyroidism, followed by hypothyroidism. The thyroid gland is located in the neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle.The cause of the disease is unknown. But it is related to an attack against the thyroid by the immune system . The disease affects women more often than men. The disease can occur in women who have just had a baby. It can also be caused by medicines such as interferon and amiodarone, and some types of chemotherapy, which affect the immune system.

Subacute thyroiditis is an immune reaction of the thyroid gland that often follows an upper respiratory infection. The thyroid gland is located in the neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle.Subacute thyroiditis is an uncommon condition. It is thought to be the result of a viral infection. The condition often occurs a few weeks after a viral infection of the ear, sinus, or throat, such as mumps, the flu, or a common cold. Subacute thyroiditis occurs most often in middle-aged women with symptoms of a viral upper respiratory tract infection in the past month.

Triiodothyronine (T3) is a thyroid hormone. It plays an important role in the body's control of metabolism (the many processes that control the rate of activity in cells and tissues). A laboratory test can be done to measure the amount of T3 in your blood.A blood sample is needed.

The T3RU test measures the level of proteins that carry thyroid hormone in the blood. This can help your health care provider interpret the results of T3 and T4 blood tests. Because tests called the free T4 blood test and thyroxine binding globulin (TBG) blood tests are now available, the T3RU test is rarely used these days.A blood sample is needed.

T4 (thyroxine) is the main hormone produced by the thyroid gland. A laboratory test can be done to measure the amount of free T4 in your blood. Free T4 is the thyroxine that is not attached to a protein in the blood.A blood sample is needed.

The TBG blood test measures the level of a protein that moves thyroid hormone throughout your body. This protein is called thyroxine binding globulin (TBG).A blood sample is taken and then sent to a laboratory for testing.

Thyroid gland removal is surgery to remove all or part of the thyroid gland. The thyroid gland is a butterfly-shaped gland located inside the front of the lower neck. The thyroid gland is part of the hormone ( endocrine ) system. It helps your body regulate your metabolism .Depending on the reason you are having your thyroid gland removed, the type of thyroidectomy you have will be either a: Total thyroidectomy, which removes the entire gland Subtotal or partial thyroidectomy, which removes part of the thyroid gland You will have general anesthesia (asleep and pain-free) for this surgery. In rare cases, the surgery is done with local anesthesia and medicine to relax you. You will be awake, but pain-free. During the surgery: The surgeon makes a horizontal cut in the front of your lower neck just above the collar bones. All or part of the gland is removed through the cut. The surgeon is careful not to damage the blood vessels and nerves in your neck. A small tube (catheter) may be placed into the area to help drain blood and other fluids that build up. The drain will be removed in 1 or 2 days. The cuts are closed with sutures (stitches). Surgery to remove your whole thyroid may take up to 4 hours. It may take less time if only part of the thyroid is removed. Newer techniques that require a smaller incision near the thyroid or at other locations and which involve the use of endoscopy have been developed.

You had surgery to remove part or all of your thyroid gland. This operation is called thyroidectomy . Now that you're going home, follow the surgeon's instructions on how to care for yourself while you heal.Depending on the reason for the surgery, either all or part of your thyroid was removed. You probably spent 1 to 3 days in the hospital.

A thyroid nodule is a growth (lump) in the thyroid gland. The thyroid gland is locatedat the front ofthe neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle.Thyroid nodules are caused by an overgrowth of cells in the thyroid gland. These growths can be: Not cancer (benign), thyroid cancer (malignant), or very rarely, other cancers or infections Fluid-filled (cysts) One nodule or a group of small nodules Producing thyroid hormones (hot nodule) or not making thyroid hormones (cold nodule) Thyroid nodules are very common. They occur more often in women than in men. A person's chance of gettinga thyroid nodule increases with age. Only a few thyroid nodules are due to thyroid cancer . A thyroid nodule is more likely to be cancer if you: Have a hard nodule Have a nodule that is stuck to nearby structures Have a family history of thyroid cancer Have noticed a change in your voice Are younger than 20 or older than 70 Have a history of radiation exposure to the head or neck Are male Causes of thyroid nodules are not always found, but can include: Hashimoto's disease (a reaction of the immune system against the thyroid gland) Lack of iodine in the diet

A thyroid scan uses a radioactive iodine tracer to examine the structure and function of the thyroid gland. This test is often done together with a radioactive iodine uptake test .The test is done in this way: You are given a pill that contains a tiny amount of radioactive iodine. After swallowing it, you wait as the iodine collects in your thyroid. The first scan is usually done 4 to 6 hours after you take the iodine pill. Another scan is usually done 24 hours later. During the scan, you lie on your back on a movable table. Your neck and chest are positioned under the scanner. You must lie still so that the scanner gets a clear image. The scanner detects the location and intensity of the rays given off by the radioactive material. A computer displays images of the thyroid gland. Other scans use a substance called technetium instead of radioactive iodine.

Thyroid storm is a very rare, but life-threatening condition of the thyroid gland that develops in cases of untreated thyrotoxicosis ( hyperthyroidism , or overactive thyroid). The thyroid gland is located in the neck, just above where your collarbones meet in the middle.Thyroid storm occurs due to a major stress such as trauma, heart attack , or infection in people with uncontrolled hyperthyroidism. In rare cases, thyroid storm can be caused by treatment of hyperthyroidism with radioactive iodine therapy for Graves disease . This can occur even a week or more after the radioactive iodine treatment.



Toxic nodular goiter involves an enlarged thyroid gland. The glandcontainsareas that have increased in size and formed nodules. One or more of these nodules produce too much thyroid hormone.Toxic nodular goiter starts from an existing simple goiter . It occurs most often in older adults. Risk factors include being female and over 55 years old. This disorder is rare in children. Most people who develop it have had a goiter with nodules for many years. Sometimes the thyroid gland is only slightly enlarged, and the goiter was not already diagnosed. Sometimes, people with toxic multinodular goiter will develop high thyroid levels for the first time. This mostly occurs after they take in a large amount of iodine through a vein (intravenously) or by mouth. The iodine may be used as contrast for a CT scan or heart catheterization . Taking medicines that contain iodine, such as amiodarone, may also lead to the disorder. Moving from a country with iodine deficiency to a country with a lot of iodine in the diet can also turn a simple goiter into a toxic goiter.

A TSH test measures the amount of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) in your blood. TSH is produced by the pituitary gland. It prompts the thyroid gland to make and release thyroid hormones into the blood.A blood sample is needed. Other thyroid tests that may be done at the same time include: T3 test (free or total) T4 test (free or total)

TSI stands for thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin. TSIs are antibodies that tell the thyroid gland to become more active and release excess amounts of thyroid hormone into the blood. A TSI test measures the amount of thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin in your blood.A blood sample is needed.















An arrhythmia is a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. When the heart beats faster than normal, it is called tachycardia. When the heart beats too slowly, it is called bradycardia. The most common type of arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation , which causes an irregular and fast heart beat. Many factors can affect your heart's rhythm, such as having had a heart attack , smoking, congenital heart defects , and stress. Some substances or medicines may also cause arrhythmias. Symptoms of arrhythmias include: Fast or slow heart beat Skipping beats Lightheadedness or dizziness Chest pain Shortness of breath Sweating Your doctor can run tests to find out if you have an arrhythmia. Treatment to restore a normal heart rhythm may include medicines, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or pacemaker , or sometimes surgery. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

An arrhythmia is a problem with the speed or rhythm of the heartbeat.  Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of arrhythmia . The cause is a disorder in the heart's electrical system. Often, people who have AF may not even feel symptoms. But you may feel
: Palpitations -- an abnormal rapid heartbeat Shortness of breath Weakness or difficulty exercising Chest pain Dizziness or fainting Fatigue Confusion AF can lead to an increased risk of stroke . In many patients, it can also cause chest pain, heart attack , or heart failure . Doctors diagnose AF using family and medical history, a physical exam, and a test called an electrocardiogram (EKG), which looks at the electrical waves your heart makes. Treatments include medicines and procedures to restore normal rhythm. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Each year almost 800,000 Americans have a heart attack. A heart attack happens when blood flow to the heart suddenly becomes blocked. Without the blood coming in, the heart can't get oxygen. If not treated quickly, the heart muscle begins to die. But if you do get quick treatment, you may be able to prevent or limit damage to the heart muscle. That's why it's important to know the symptoms of a heart attack and call 911 if you or someone else is having them. You should call, even if you are not sure that it is a heart attack. The most common symptoms in men and women are: Chest discomfort. It is often in center or left side of the chest. It usually lasts more than a few minutes. It may go away and come back. It can feel like pressure, squeezing, fullness, or pain . It also can feel like heartburn or indigestion. Shortness of breath. Sometimes this is your only symptom. You may get it before or during the chest discomfort. It can happen when you are resting or doing a little bit of physical activity. Discomfort in the upper body. You may feel pain or discomfort in one or both arms, the back, shoulders, neck, jaw, or upper part of the stomach. You may also have other symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and lightheadedness. You may break out in a cold sweat. Sometimes women will have different symptoms then men. For example, they are more likely to feel tired for no reason. The most common cause of heart attacks is coronary artery disease (CAD). With CAD, there is a buildup of cholesterol and other material, called plaque, on their inner walls or the arteries. This is atherosclerosis . It can build up for years. Eventually an area of plaque can rupture (break open). A blood clot can form around the plaque and block the artery. A less common cause of heart attack is a severe spasm (tightening) of a coronary artery. The spasm cuts off blood flow through the artery. At the hospital, health care providers make a diagnosis based on your symptoms, blood tests, and different heart health tests . Treatments may include medicines and medical procedures such as coronary angioplasty . After a heart attack, cardiac rehabilitation and lifestyle changes can help you recover. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

A congenital heart defect is a problem with the structure of the heart. It is present at birth. Congenital heart defects are the most common type of birth defect. The defects can involve the walls of the heart, the valves of the heart, and the arteries and veins near the heart. They can disrupt the normal flow of blood through the heart. The blood flow can slow down, go in the wrong direction or to the wrong place, or be blocked completely. Doctors use a physical exam and special heart tests to diagnose congenital heart defects. They often find severe defects during pregnancy or soon after birth. Signs and symptoms of severe defects in newborns include: Rapid breathing Cyanosis - a bluish tint to the skin, lips, and fingernails Fatigue Poor blood circulation Many congenital heart defects cause few or no signs and symptoms. They are often not diagnosed until children are older. Many children with congenital heart defects don't need treatment, but others do. Treatment can include medicines, catheter procedures, surgery, and heart transplants. The treatment depends on the type of the defect, how severe it is, and a child's age, size, and general health. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

An arrhythmia is any disorder of your heart rate or rhythm. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. Most arrhythmias result from problems in the electrical system of the heart. If your arrhythmia is serious, you may need a cardiac pacemaker or an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD).  They are devices that are implanted in your chest or abdomen. A pacemaker helps control abnormal heart rhythms. It uses electrical pulses to prompt the heart to beat at a normal rate. It can speed up a slow heart rhythm, control a fast heart rhythm, and coordinate the chambers of the heart. An ICD monitors heart rhythms. If it senses dangerous rhythms, it delivers shocks. This treatment is called defibrillation. An ICD can help control life-threatening arrhythmias, especially those that can cause sudden cardiac arrest (SCA). Most new ICDs can act as both a pacemaker and a defibrillator. Many ICDs also record the heart's electrical patterns when there is an abnormal heartbeat. This can help the doctor plan future treatment. Getting a pacemaker or ICD requires minor surgery. You usually need to stay in the hospital for a day or two, so your doctor can make sure that the device is working well. You will probably be back to your normal activities within a few days.





An arrhythmia is a disorder of the heart rate (pulse) or heart rhythm. The heart can beat too fast (tachycardia), too slow (bradycardia), or irregularly. An arrhythmia can be harmless, a sign of other heart problems, or an immediate danger to your health.Normally, your heart works as a pump that brings blood to the lungs and the rest of the body. To help this happen, your heart has an electrical system that makes sure it contracts (squeezes) in an orderly way. The electrical impulse that signals your heart to contract begins in an area of the heart called the sinoatrial node (also called the sinus node or SA node). This is your hearts natural pacemaker. The signal leaves the SA node and travels through the heart along a set electrical pathway. Different nerve messages signal your heart to beat slower or faster. Arrhythmias are caused by problems with the heart's electrical conduction system. Abnormal (extra) signals may occur. Electrical signals may be blocked or slowed. Electrical signals travel in new or different pathways through the heart. Some common causes of abnormal heartbeats are: Abnormal levels of potassium or other substances in the body Heart attack, or a damaged heart muscle from a past heart attack Heart disease that is present at birth (congenital) Heart failure or an enlarged heart Overactive thyroid gland Watch this video about: Arrhythmias Arrhythmias may also be caused by some substances or drugs, including: Alcohol or stimulant drugs Certain medicines Cigarette smoking (nicotine) Some of the more common abnormal heart rhythms are: Atrial fibrillation or flutter Atrioventricular nodal reentry tachycardia (AVNRT) Heart block or atrioventricular block Multifocal atrial tachycardia Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia Sick sinus syndrome Ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome

Atrial fibrillation or flutter is a common type of abnormal heartbeat. The heart rhythm is fast and most often irregular.When working well, the 4 chambers of the heart contract (squeeze) in an organized way. Electrical signals direct your heart to pump the right amount of blood for your body's needs. The signals begin in an area called the sinoatrial node (also called the sinus node or SA node). In atrial fibrillation, the electrical impulse of the heart is not regular. This is because the sinoatrial node no longer controls the heart rhythm. Parts of the heart cannot contract in an organized pattern. As a result, the heart cannot pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. In atrial flutter, the ventricles (lower heart chambers) may beat very rapidly, but in a regular pattern. These problems can affect both men and women. They become more common with increasing age. Common causes of atrial fibrillation include: Alcohol use (especially binge drinking) Coronary artery disease Heart attack or heart bypass surgery Heart failure or an enlarged heart Heart valve disease (most often the mitral valve) Hypertension Medicines Overactive thyroid gland ( hyperthyroidism ) Pericarditis Sick sinus syndrome

Cardiac ablation is a procedure that is used to scar small areas in your heart that may be involved in your heart rhythm problems . This can prevent the abnormal electrical signals or rhythms from moving through the heart. During the procedure, small wires called electrodes are placed inside your heart to measure your heart's electrical activity. When the source of the problem is found, the tissue causing the problem is destroyed.There are two methods for performing cardiac ablation: Radiofrequency ablation uses heat energy to eliminate the problem area. Cryoablation uses very cold temperatures. The type of procedure you have will depend on what kind of abnormal heart rhythm you have. Cardiac ablation procedures are done in a hospital laboratory by trained staff. This includes cardiologists (heart doctors), technicians, and nurses. The setting is safe and controlled so your risk is as low as possible. You will be given medicine (a sedative) before the procedure to help you relax. The skin on your neck, arm, or groin will be cleaned well and made numb with an anesthetic. Next, the doctor will make a small cut in the skin. A small, flexible tube (catheter) will be inserted through this cut into one of the blood vessels in the area. The doctor will use live x-ray images to carefully guide the catheter up into your heart. Sometimes more than one catheter is needed. Once the catheter is in place, your doctor will place small electrodes in different areas of your heart. These electrodes are connected to monitors that allow the cardiologist to tell what area in your heart is causing problems with your heart rhythm. In most cases, there are one or more specific areas. Once the source of the problem has been found, one of the catheter lines is used to send electrical (or sometimes cold) energy to the problem area. This creates a small scar that causes the heart rhythm problem to stop. Catheter ablation is a long procedure. It can last 4 or more hours. During the procedure your heart will be monitored closely. A health care provider may ask you if you are having symptoms at different times during the procedure. Symptoms you may feel are: A brief burning when medicines are injected A faster or stronger heartbeat Lightheadedness Burning when the electrical energy is used



A cardiac event monitor is a device that you control to record the electrical activity of your heart (ECG). This device is about the size of a pager. It records your heart rate and rhythm. Cardiac event monitors are used when you need long-term monitoring of symptoms that occur less than daily.Each type of monitor is slightly different, but they all have sensors (called electrodes) to record your ECG. In some models, these attach to the skin on your chest using sticky patches. The sensors need good contact with your skin. Poor contact can cause poor results. You should keep your skin free from oils, creams, and sweat (as much as possible). The technician who places the monitor will perform the following to get a good ECG recording: Men will have the area on their chest shaved where the electrode patches will be placed. The area of skin where the electrodes will be attached will be cleaned with alcohol before the sensors are attached. You can carry or wear a cardiac event monitor up to 30 days. You carry the device in your hand, wear on your wrist, or keep it in your pocket. Event monitors can be worn for weeks or until symptoms occur. There are several types of cardiac event monitors. Loop memory monitor. The electrodes remain attached to your chest, and the monitor constantly records, but does not save, your ECG. When you feel symptoms, you press a button to activate the device. The device will then save the ECG from shortly before, during, and for a time after your symptoms begin. Some event monitors start on their own if they detect abnormal heart rhythms. Symptom event monitor. This device records your ECG only when symptoms occur, not before they occur. You carry this device in a pocket or wear it on your wrist. When you feel symptoms, you turn on the device and place the electrodes on your chest to record the ECG. Patch recorders. This monitor does not use wires or electrodes. It continuously monitors ECG activity for 14 days using an adhesive patch that sticks to the chest. Implanted loop recorders. This is a small monitor that is implanted under the skin on the chest. It can be left in place to monitor heart rhythms for 3 or more years. While wearing the device: You should continue your normal activities while wearing the monitor. You may be asked to exercise or adjust your activity level during the test. Keep a diary of what activities you do while wearing the monitor, how you feel, and any symptoms you have. This will help your health care provider match symptoms with your monitor findings. The monitoring station staff will tell you how to transfer data over the telephone. Your provider will look at the data and see if there have been any abnormal heart rhythms. The monitoring company or the provider who ordered the monitor may contact you if a concerning rhythm is discovered. While wearing the device, you may be asked to avoid certain things that can disrupt the signal between the sensors and the monitor. These may include: Cell phones Electric blankets Electric toothbrushes High-voltage areas Magnets Metal detectors Ask the technician who attaches the device for a list of things to avoid.

Cardioversion is a method to bring an abnormal heart rhythm back to normal.Cardioversion can be done using an electric shock or with drugs. ELECTRICAL CARDIOVERSION Electrical cardioversion is done with a device that gives off an electrical shock to the heart to change the rhythm back to normal. The device is called a defibrillator. The shock can be delivered from a device outside the body called an external defibrillator. These are found in emergency rooms, ambulances, or some public places such as airports. Electrode patches are placed on the chest and back. The patches are connected to the defibrillator. Or, paddles attached to the devices are placed directly onto the chest. The defibrillator is activated and an electric shock is delivered to your heart. This shock briefly stops all electrical activity of the heart. Then it allows the normal heart rhythm to return. Sometimes more than one shock, or a shock with higher energy is needed. An external defibrillator is used to treat abnormal heart rhythms ( arrhythmia ) that cause collapse and cardiac arrest. Examples are ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation. These same devices may also be used to treat less dangerous abnormal rhythms, problems such as atrial fibrillation. Some people may need to start blood thinners beforehand to prevent small blood clots. You will be given medicine to help you relax before the procedure. After the procedure, you may be given medicines to prevent blood clots or to help prevent the arrhythmia from coming back. An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) is a device that is placed inside your body. It is most often used in people who are at risk for sudden death because their heart function is so poor, or they have had dangerous heart rhythms before. The ICD is implanted underneath the skin of your upper chest or abdomen. Wires are attached that go into or near the heart. If the device detects a dangerous heartbeat, it sends an electrical shock to the heart to change the rhythm back to normal. CARDIOVERSION USING DRUGS Cardioversion can be done using drugs that are taken by mouth or given through an intravenous line (IV). It can take from several minutes to days for this treatment to work. This treatment is often done while in a hospital where your heart rhythm will be monitored. Cardioversion using drugs can be done outside the hospital. This treatment is most often used for people with atrial fibrillation that comes and goes. However, you will need to be closely followed-up by a cardiologist. You may be given blood thinning medicines to prevent blood clots from forming and leaving the heart (which can cause a stroke). COMPLICATIONS Complications of cardioversion are uncommon, but may include: Allergic reactions from medicines used Blood clots that can cause a stroke or other organ damage Bruising, burning, or pain where the electrodes were used Worsening of the arrhythmia People who perform external cardioversion may be shocked if the procedure is not done correctly. This can cause heart rhythm problems, pain, and even death.

Digitalis is a medicine that is used to treat certain heart conditions. Digitalis toxicity can be a side effect of digitalis therapy. It may occur when you take too much of the drug at one time. It can also occur when levels of the drug build up for other reasons such as other medical problems you have. The most common prescription form of this medicine is called digoxin. Digitoxin is another form of digitalis.Digitalis toxicity can be caused by high levels of digitalis in the body. A lower tolerance to the drug can also cause digitalis toxicity. People with lower tolerance may have a normal level of digitalis in their blood. They may develop digitalis toxicity if they have other risk factors. People with heart failure who take digoxin are commonly given medicines called diuretics. This drugsremove excess fluid from the body. Many diuretics can cause potassium loss. A low level of potassium in the body can increase the risk of digitalis toxicity. Digitalis toxicity may also develop in people who take digoxin and have a low level of magnesium in their body. You are more likely to have this condition if you take digoxin, digitoxin, or other digitalis medicines along with drugs that interact with it. Some of these drugs are quinidine, flecainide, verapamil, and amiodarone. If your kidneys do not work well, digitalis can build up in your body. Normally, it is removed through the urine. Any problem that affects how your kidneys work (including dehydration ) makes digitalis toxicity more likely. Some plants contain chemicals that can cause symptoms similar to digitalis toxicity if they are eaten. These include foxglove, oleander, and lily of the valley.

Ectopic heartbeats are changes in a heartbeat that is otherwise normal. These changes lead to extra or skipped heartbeats. There is often not a clear cause for these changes. They are common. The two most common types of ectopic heartbeats are: Premature ventricular contractions (PVC) Premature atrial contractions (PAC)Ectopic heartbeats are sometimes seen with: Changes in the blood, such as a low potassium level ( hypokalemia ) Decrease in blood supply to the heart When the heart is enlarged or structurally abnormal Ectopic beats may be caused or made worse by smoking, alcohol use , caffeine , stimulant medicines, and some street drugs. Ectopic heartbeats are rare in children without heart disease that was present at birth (congenital). Most extra heartbeats in children are PACs. These are often benign. In adults, ectopic heartbeats are common. They are most often due to PACs or PVCs. Your health care provider should look into the cause when they are frequent. Treatment is directed at symptoms and the underlying cause.

Heart block is a problem in the electrical signals in the heart. Normally, the heart beat starts in an area in the top chambers of the heart (atria). This area is the heart's pacemaker. The electrical signals travel to the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles). This keeps the heart beat steady and regular. Heart block occurs when the electrical signal is slowed down or does not reach the bottom chambers of the heart. Your heart may beat slowly, or it may skip beats. Heart block may resolve on its own, or it may be permanent and require treatment. There are three degrees of heart block. First-degree heart block is the mildest type and third-degree is the most severe. First-degree heart block: Rarely has symptoms or causes problems Second-degree heart block: The electrical impulse may not reach the lower chambers of the heart. The heart may miss a beat or beats and may be slow and irregular. You may feel dizzy, faint, or have other symptoms. This may be serious in some cases. Third-degree heart block: The electrical signal does not move to the lower chambers of the heart. In this case, the lower chambers beat at a much slower rate, and the upper and lower chambers do not beat sequentially (one after the other) as they do normally. The heart fails to pump enough blood to the body. This can lead to fainting and shortness of breath. This is an emergency that needs medical help right away.Heart block may be caused by: Side effects of medicines. Heart block can be a side effect of digitalis, beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, and other medicines. A heart attack that damages the electrical system in the heart. Heart diseases, such as heart valve disease and cardiac sarcoidosis. Some infections, such as Lyme disease. Heart surgery. You may have heart block because you were born with it. You are more at risk for this if: You have a heart defect. Your mother has an autoimmune disease, such as lupus. Some normal people, will have a first degree block especially at rest or when asleep. This most often occurs in young healthy people.

Palpitations are feelings or sensations that your heart is pounding or racing. They can be felt in your chest, throat, or neck. You may: Have an unpleasant awareness of your own heartbeat Feel like your heart skipped or stopped beats The heart's rhythm may be normal or abnormal when you have palpitations.Normally the heart beats 60 to 100 times per minute. The rate may drop below 60 beats per minute in people who exercise routinely or take medicines that slow the heart. If your heart rate is fast (over 100 beats per minute), this is called tachycardia. A heart rate slower than 60 is called bradycardia. An occasional extra heartbeat out of rhythm is known as extrasystole . Palpitations are not serious most of the time. Sensations representing an abnormal heart rhythm ( arrhythmia ) may be more serious. The following conditions make you more likely to have an abnormal heart rhythm: Known heart disease at the time the palpitations begin Significant risk factors for heart disease An abnormal heart valve An electrolyte abnormality in your blood -- for example, a low potassium level



Intracardiac electrophysiology study (EPS) is a test to look at how well the heart's electrical signals are working. It is used to check for abnormal heartbeats or heart rhythms .Wire electrodes are placed in the heart to do this test. These electrodes measure electrical activity in the heart. The procedure is done in a hospital laboratory. The staff will include a cardiologist, technicians, and nurses. To have this study: Your groin and/or neck area will be cleaned and numbing medicine (anesthetic) will be applied to the skin. The cardiologist will then place several IVs (called sheaths) into the groin or neck area. Once these IVs are in place, wires or electrodes can be passed through the sheaths into your body. The doctor uses moving x-ray images to guide the catheter into the heart and place the electrodes in the right places. The electrodes pick up the heart's electrical signals. Electrical signals from the electrodes may be used to make the heart skip beats or produce an abnormal heart rhythm. This can help the doctor understand more about what is causing the abnormal heart rhythm or where in the heart it is starting. You may also be given medicines that may also be used for the same purpose. Other procedures that may also be done during the test: Placement of a heart pacemaker Procedure to modify small areas in your heart that may be causing your heart rhythm problems (called catheter ablation ) Watch this video about: Cardiac conduction system

Multifocal atrial tachycardia (MAT) is a rapid heart rate . It occurs when too many signals (electrical impulses) are sent from the upper heart (atria) to the lower heart (ventricles).The human heart gives off electrical impulses, or signals, which tell it to beat. Normally, these signals begin in an area of the upper right chamber called the sinoatrial node (sinus node or SA node). This node is considered the heart's "natural pacemaker." It helps control the heartbeat. When the heart detects a signal, it contracts (or beats). The normal heart rate in adults is about 60 to 100 beats per minute. The normal heart rate is faster in children. In MAT, many locations in the atria fire signals at the same time. Too many signals lead to a rapid heart rate. It most often ranges between 100 to 130 beats per minute or more in adults. The rapid heart rate causes the heart to work too hard and not move blood efficiently. If the heartbeat is very fast, there is less time for the heart chamber to fill with blood between beats. Therefore, not enough blood is pumped to the brain and the rest of the body with each contraction. MAT is most common in people age 50 and over. It is often seen in people with conditions that lower the amount of oxygen in the blood. These conditions include: Bacterial pneumonia Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) Congestive heart failure Lung cancer Lung failure Pulmonary embolism You may be at higher risk for MAT if you have: Coronary heart disease Diabetes Had surgery within the last 6 weeks Overdosed on the drug theophylline Sepsis When the heart rate is less than 100 beats per minute, the arrhythmia is called "wandering atrial pacemaker."

Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) is episodes of rapid heart rate that start in a part of the heart above the ventricles. "Paroxysmal" means from time to time.Normally, the chambers of the heart (atria and ventricles) contract in a coordinated manner. The contractions are caused by an electrical signal that begins in an area of the heart called the sinoatrial node (also called the sinus node or SA node). The signal moves through the upper heart chambers (the atria) and tells the atria to contract. After this, the signal moves down in the heart and tells the lower chambers (the ventricles) to contract. The rapid heart rate from PSVT may start with events that occur in areas of the heart above the lower chambers (ventricles). There are a number of specific causes of PSVT. It can develop when doses of the heart medicine, digitalis, are too high. It can also occur with a condition known as Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome , which is most often seen in young people and infants. The following increase your risk for PSVT: Alcohol use Caffeine use Illicit drug use Smoking

The pulse is the number of heartbeats per minute.The pulse can be measured at areas where an artery passes close to the skin. These areas include the: Back of the knees Groin Neck Temple Top or inner side of the foot Wrist To measure the pulse at your wrist, place your index and middle finger over the underside of your opposite wrist, below the base of the thumb. Press with flat fingers until you feel the pulse. To measure the pulse on the neck, place the index and middle fingers just to the side of the Adam's apple, in the soft, hollow area. Press gently until you locate the pulse. Note: Sit or lie down before taking the neck pulse. The neck arteries in some people are sensitive to pressure. Fainting or slowing of the heartbeat can result. Also, do not take the pulses on both sides of the neck at the same time. Doing so can slow the flow of blood to the head and lead to fainting. Once you find the pulse, count the beats for 1 full minute. Or, count the beats for 30 seconds and multiply by 2. This will give the beats per minute.

Normally, the heartbeat starts in an area in the top chambers of the heart (atria). This area is the heart's pacemaker. It is called the sinoatrial node, sinus node or SA node. Its role is to keep the heart beat steady and regular. Sick sinus syndrome is a group of heart rhythm problems due to problems with the sinus node, such as: The heartbeat rate is too slow, called sinus bradycardia The heartbeat pauses or stops, called sinus pauses or sinus arrest Episodes of a fast heart rate Slow heart rhythms that alternate with fast heart rhythms, called bradycardia-tachycardia or "tachy-brady syndrome"Sick sinus syndrome most often occurs in people older than age 50. It is often due to scar-like damage to electrical pathways in the heart muscle tissue. In children, heart surgery on the upper chambers is a common cause of sick sinus syndrome. Coronary heart disease , high blood pressure, and aortic and mitral valve diseases may occur with sick sinus syndrome. However, these diseases may have nothing to do with the syndrome. Sick sinus syndrome is uncommon, but not rare. It is the most common reason people need to have an artificial pacemaker implanted. Sinus bradycardia occurs more often than the other types of the condition. Tachycardias (rapid heart rhythms) that start in the upper chambers of the heart may be part of the syndrome. These include atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, atrial tachycardia. A period of fast heart rates is often followed by very slow heart rates. When there are periods of both slow and fast heart rates (rhythms) the condition often will be called tachy-brady syndrome. Some medicines can make abnormal heart rhythms worse, especially when doses are high. These include digitalis, calcium channel blockers, beta-blockers, and antiarrhythmics.

Ventricular fibrillation (VF) is a severely abnormal heart rhythm ( arrhythmia ) that is life threatening.The heart pumps blood to the lungs, brain, and other organs. If the heartbeat is interrupted, even for a few seconds, it can lead to fainting (syncope) or cardiac arrest. Fibrillation is an uncontrolled twitching or quivering of muscle fibers (fibrils). When it occurs in the lower chambers of the heart, it is called VF. During VF, blood is not pumped from the heart. Sudden cardiac death results. The most common cause of VF is a heart attack. However, VF can occur whenever the heart muscle does not get enough oxygen. Conditions that can lead to VF include: Electrocution accidents or injury to the heart Heart attack or angina Heart disease that is present at birth (congenital) Heart muscle disease in which the heart muscle becomes weakened and stretched or thickened Heart surgery Sudden cardiac death (commotio cordis); most often occurs in athletes who have had a sudden blow to the area directly over the heart Medicines Very high or very low potassium levels in the blood Many people with VF have no history of heart disease. However, they often have heart disease risk factors, such as smoking, high blood pressure, and diabetes.

Ventricular tachycardia (VT) is a rapid heartbeat that starts in the lower chambers of the heart (ventricles).VT is a pulse rate of more than 100 beats per minute, with at least 3 irregular heartbeats in a row. The condition can develop as an early or late complication of a heart attack . It may also occur in people with: Cardiomyopathy Heart failure Heart surgery Myocarditis Valvular heart disease VT can occur without heart disease. Scar tissue may form in the muscle of the ventricles days, months, or years after a heart attack. This can lead to ventricular tachycardia. VT can also be caused by: Anti-arrhythmic drugs (used to treat an abnormal heart rhythm) Changes in blood chemistry (such as a low potassium level) Changes in pH (acid-base) Lack of enough oxygen "Torsade de pointes" is a specific form of VT. It is often due to congenital heart disease or the use of certain medicines.

Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome is a condition in which there is an extra electrical pathway in the heart that leads to periods of rapid heart rate ( tachycardia ). WPW syndrome is one of the most common causes of fast heart rate problems in infants and children.Normally, electrical signals follow a certain pathway through the heart. This helps the heart beat regularly. This prevents the heart from having extra beats or beats happening too soon. In people with WPW syndrome, some of the heart's electrical signals go down an extra pathway. This may cause a very rapid heart rate called supraventricular tachycardia. Most people with WPW syndrome do not have any other heart problems. However, this condition has been linked with other cardiac conditions, such as Ebstein anomaly . A form of the condition also runs in families.



Heart diseases are the number one killer in the U.S. They are also a major cause of disability. If you do have a heart disease, it is important to find it early, when it is easier to treat. Blood tests and heart health tests can help find heart diseases or identify problems that can lead to heart diseases. There are several different types of heart health tests. Your doctor will decide which test or tests you need, based on your symptoms (if any), risk factors, and medical history. Cardiac Catheterization Cardiac catheterization is a medical procedure used to diagnose and treat some heart conditions. For the procedure, your doctor puts a catheter (a long, thin, flexible tube) into a blood vessel in your arm, groin, or neck, and threads it to your heart. The doctor can use the catheter to: Do a coronary angiography. This involves putting a special type of dye in the catheter, so the dye can flow through your bloodstream to your heart. Then your doctor takes x-rays of your heart. The dye allows your doctor to see your coronary arteries on the x-ray, and to check for coronary artery disease (plaque buildup in the arteries). Take samples of blood and heart muscle Do procedures such as minor heart surgery or angioplasty , if your doctor finds that you need it Cardiac CT Scan A cardiac CT ( computed tomography ) scan is a painless imaging test that uses x-rays to take detailed pictures of your heart and its blood vessels. Computers can combine these pictures to create a three-dimensional (3D) model of the whole heart. This test can help doctors detect or evaluate: Coronary artery disease Calcium buildup in the coronary arteries Problems with the aorta Problems with heart function and valves Pericardial diseases Before you have the test, you get an injection of contrast dye. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the pictures. The CT scanner is a large, tunnel-like machine. You lie still on a table which slides you into the scanner, and the scanner takes the pictures for about 15 minutes. Cardiac MRI Cardiac MRI ( magnetic resonance imaging ) is a painless imaging test that uses radio waves, magnets, and a computer to create detailed pictures of your heart. It can help your doctor figure out whether you have heart disease, and if so, how severe it is. A cardiac MRI can also help your doctor decide the best way to treat heart problems such as: Coronary artery disease Heart valve problems Pericarditis Cardiac tumors Damage from a heart attack The MRI is a large, tunnel-like machine. You lie still on a table which slides you into the MRI machine. The machine makes loud noises as it takes pictures of your heart. It usually takes about 30-90 minutes. Sometimes before the test, you might get an injection of contrast dye. The dye highlights your heart and blood vessels in the pictures. Chest X-Ray A chest x-ray creates pictures of the organs and structures inside your chest, such as your heart, lungs, and blood vessels. It can reveal signs of heart failure , as well as lung disorders and other causes of symptoms not related to heart disease. Coronary Angiography Coronary angiography (angiogram) is a procedure that uses contrast dye and x-ray pictures to look at the insides of your arteries. It can show whether plaque is blocking your arteries and how severe the blockage is. Doctors use this procedure to diagnose heart diseases after chest pain , sudden cardiac arrest (SCA), or abnormal results from other heart tests such as an EKG or a stress test. You usually have a cardiac catheterization to get the dye into your coronary arteries. Then you have special x-rays while the dye is flowing through your coronary arteries. The dye lets your doctor study the flow of blood through your heart and blood vessels. Echocardiography Echocardiography, or echo, is a painless test that uses sound waves to create moving pictures of your heart. The pictures show the size and shape of your heart. They also show how well your heart's chambers and valves are working. Doctors use an echo to diagnose many different heart problems, and to check how severe they are. For the test, a technician applies gel to your chest. The gel helps sound waves reach your heart. The technician moves a transducer (wand-like device) around on your chest. The transducer connects to a computer. It transmits ultrasound waves into your chest, and the waves bounce (echo) back. The computer converts the echoes into pictures of your heart. Electrocardiogram (EKG), (ECG) An electrocardiogram, also called an ECG or EKG, is a painless test that detects and records your heart's electrical activity. It shows how fast your heart is beating and whether its rhythm is steady or irregular. An EKG may be part of a routine exam to screen for heart disease. Or you may get it to detect and study heart problems such as heart attacks, arrhythmia , and heart failure. For the test, you lie still on a table and a nurse or technician attaches electrodes (patches that have sensors) to the skin on your chest, arms, and legs. Wires connect the electrodes to a machine that records your heart's electrical activity. Stress Testing Stress testing looks at how your heart works during physical stress. It can help to diagnose coronary artery disease, and to check how severe it is. It can also check for other problems, including heart valve disease and heart failure. For the test, you exercise (or are given medicine if you are unable to exercise) to make your heart work hard and beat fast. While this is happening, you get an EKG and blood pressure monitoring. Sometimes you may also have an echocardiogram, or other imaging tests such as a nuclear scan . For the nuclear scan, you get an injection of a tracer (a radioactive substance), which travels to your heart. Special cameras detect the energy from the tracer to make pictures of your heart. You have pictures taken after you exercise, and then after you rest. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute









When you're dizzy, you may feel lightheaded, woozy, or disoriented. If you feel like you or the room are spinning, you have vertigo. These feelings may make you lose your balance . Dizziness can have many different causes. A sudden drop in blood pressure or being dehydrated can make you dizzy. Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down. Certain medicines and problems with your inner ear may cause dizziness. So can motion sickness . Sometimes dizziness can be a symptom of other disorders. As people get older, they may have more health problems and take more medicines. This makes them more likely to have problems with dizziness and balance. Dizziness usually gets better by itself or is easily treated. If you are dizzy often, you should see your health care provider to find the cause. NIH: National Institutes of Health

Have you ever felt dizzy , lightheaded, or as if the room is spinning around you? If the feeling happens often, it could be a sign of a balance problem. Balance problems can make you feel unsteady. You may also have blurred vision, confusion, and disorientation. They are one cause of falls and fall-related injuries, such as a hip fracture (broken hip). Some balance problems are due to problems in the inner ear. Others may involve another part of the body, such as the brain or the heart. Aging, infections, head injury, certain medicines, or problems with blood circulation may also cause balance problems. It is important to see your doctor about balance problems. They can be a sign of other health problems, such as an ear infection or a stroke. Your doctor may send you to a specialist for a diagnosis. You may need a hearing test, blood tests, or imaging studies of your head and brain. Other possible tests look at your eye movements, and how your body responds to movement. In some cases, treating the illness that is causing the disorder will help with the balance problem. Exercises, a change in diet, and some medicines also can help. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders

You've probably heard that high blood pressure is a problem. Sometimes blood pressure that is too low can also cause problems. Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps out blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is the diastolic pressure. Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually they're written one above or before the other, such as 120/80. If your blood pressure reading is 90/60 or lower, you have low blood pressure. Some people have low blood pressure all the time. They have no symptoms and their low readings are normal for them. In other people, blood pressure drops below normal because of a medical condition or certain medicines. Some people may have symptoms of low blood pressure when standing up too quickly.  Low blood pressure is a problem only if it causes dizziness , fainting or in extreme cases, shock . NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is dehydration? Dehydration is condition caused by the loss of too much fluid from the body .  It happens when you are losing more fluids than you are taking in, and your body does not have enough fluids to work properly. What causes dehydration? You can become dehydrated because of: Diarrhea Vomiting Sweating too much Urinating too much, which can happen because of certain medicines and illnesses Fever Not drinking enough Who is at risk for dehydration? Certain people have a higher risk of dehydration: Older adults. Some people lose their sense of thirst as they age, so they don't drink enough fluids. Infants and young children, who are more likely to have diarrhea or vomiting People with chronic illnesses that cause them to urinate or sweat more often, such as diabetes , cystic fibrosis , or kidney problems People who take medicines that cause them to urinate or sweat more People who exercise or work outdoors during hot weather What are the symptoms of dehydration? In adults , the symptoms of dehydration include: Feeling very thirsty Dry mouth Urinating and sweating less than usual Dark-colored urine Dry skin Feeling tired Dizziness In infants and young children , the symptoms of dehydration include: Dry mouth and tongue Crying without tears No wet diapers for 3 hours or more A high fever Being unusually sleepy or drowsy Irritability Eyes that look sunken Dehydration can be mild, or it can be severe enough to be life-threatening. Get medical help right away if the symptoms also include: Confusion Fainting Lack of urination Rapid heartbeat Rapid breathing Shock How is dehydration diagnosed? To make a diagnosis, your health care provider will: Do a physical exam Check your vital signs Ask about your symptoms You may also have: Blood tests to check your electrolyte levels, especially potassium and sodium . Electrolytes are minerals in your body that have an electric charge. They have many important jobs, including helping to keep a balance of fluids in your body. Blood tests to check your kidney function Urine tests to check for dehydration and its cause What are the treatments for dehydration? The treatment for dehydration is to replace the fluids and electrolytes that you have lost. For mild cases, you may just need to drink lots of water. If you lost electrolytes, sports drinks may help. There are also oral rehydration solutions for children. You can buy those without a prescription. Severe cases may be treated with intravenous (IV) fluids with salt in a hospital. Can dehydration be prevented? The key to preventing dehydration is making sure that you get enough fluids: Drink enough water every day. Each person's needs can be different, so ask your health care provider how much you should be drinking each day. If you are exercising in the heat and losing a lot of minerals in sweat, sports drinks can be helpful Avoid drinks that have sugar and caffeine Drink extra fluids when the weather is hot or when you are sick

Your ear has three main parts: outer, middle and inner. You use all of them in hearing. Sound waves come in through your outer ear. They reach your middle ear, where they make your eardrum vibrate. The vibrations are transmitted through three tiny bones, called ossicles, in your middle ear. The vibrations travel to your inner ear, a snail-shaped organ. The inner ear makes the nerve impulses that are sent to the brain. Your brain recognizes them as sounds. The inner ear also controls balance. A variety of conditions may affect your hearing or balance : Ear infections are the most common illness in infants and young children. Tinnitus , a roaring in your ears, can be the result of loud noises, medicines or a variety of other causes. Meniere's disease may be the result of fluid problems in your inner ear; its symptoms include tinnitus and dizziness. Ear barotrauma is an injury to your ear because of changes in barometric (air) or water pressure. Some ear disorders can result in hearing disorders and deafness .

Motion sickness is a common problem in people traveling by car, train, airplanes, and 
especially boats. Anyone can get it, but it is more common in children, pregnant women, and people taking certain medicines. Motion sickness can start suddenly, with a queasy feeling and cold sweats. It can then lead to dizziness and nausea and vomiting . Your brain senses movement by getting signals from your inner ears, eyes, muscles, and joints. When it gets signals that do not match, you can get motion sickness. For example, if you are reading on your phone while riding a bus, your eyes are focused on something that is not moving, but your inner ear senses motion. Where you sit can make a difference. The front seat of a car, forward cars of a train, upper deck on a boat or wing seats in a plane may give you a smoother ride. Looking out into the distance - instead of trying to read or look at something in the vehicle - can also help. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention



Benign positional vertigo is the most common type of vertigo. Vertigo is the feeling that you are spinning or that everything is spinning around you. It may occur when you move your head in a certain position.Benign positional vertigo is also called benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). It is caused by a problem in the inner ear. The inner ear has fluid-filled tubes called semicircular canals. When you move, the fluid moves inside these tubes. The canals are very sensitive to any movement of the fluid. The sensation of the fluid moving in the tube tells your brain the position of your body. This helps you keep your balance. BPPV occurs when small pieces of bone-like calcium (called canaliths) breaks free and floats inside the tube. This sends confusing messages to your brain about your body's position. BPPV has no major risk factors. But, your risk of developing BPPV may increase if you have: Family members with BPPV Had a prior head injury (even a slight bump to the head) Had an inner ear infection called labyrinthitis

You may have seen your health care provider because you have had benign positional vertigo . It is also called benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, or BPPV. BPPV is the most common cause of vertigo and the easiest to treat.Your provider may have treated your vertigo with the Epley maneuver . These are head movements that correct the inner ear problem that causes BPPV. After you go home: For the rest of the day, do not bend over. For several days after treatment, do not sleep on the side that triggers symptoms. Follow any other specific instructions your provider gave you. Most of the time, treatment will cure BPPV. Sometimes, vertigo may return after a few weeks. About half the time, BPPV will come back later on. If this happens, you will need to be treated again. Your provider may prescribe medicines that can help relieve spinning sensations. But, these medicines often do not work well for treating the actual vertigo.

Caloric stimulation is a test that uses differences in temperature to diagnose damage to the acoustic nerve. This is the nerve that is involved in hearing and balance. The test also checks for damage to the brain stem.This test stimulates your acoustic nerve by delivering cold or warm water or air into your ear canal. When cold water or air enters your ear and the inner ear changes temperature, it should cause fast, side-to-side eye movements called nystagmus . The test is done in the following way: Before the test, your ear, especially the eardrum, will be checked. This is to make sure it is normal. One ear is tested at a time. A small amount of cold water or air is gently delivered into one of your ears. Your eyes should show an involuntary movement called nystagmus. Then they should turn away from that ear and slowly back. If water is used, it is allowed to drain out of the ear canal. Next, a small amount of warm water or air is gently delivered into the same ear. Again, your eyes should show nystagmus. Then they should turn toward that ear and slowly back. Your other ear is tested in the same way. During the test, the health care provider may observe your eyes directly. Most often, this test is done as part of another test called electronystagmography .

Dizziness is a term that is often used to describe 2 different symptoms: lightheadedness and vertigo. Lightheadedness is a feeling that you might faint. Vertigo is a feeling that you are spinning or moving, or that the world is spinning around you. Vertigo-associated disorders is a related topic.Most causes of dizziness are not serious, and they either quickly get better on their own or are easy to treat.

Dizziness can describe a variety of symptoms. You may feel lightheaded, woozy, unsteady, or like you might faint. Dizziness can also describe the feeling that you are spinning or moving, or you feel like the world is spinning around you. This is called vertigo. The feeling of spinning: Often starts suddenly Is usually started by moving the head Lasts a few seconds to minutes This article is about self-care for vertigo.Most often, people say the spinning feeling can start when they roll over in bed or tilt their head up to look at something. Along with dizziness and vertigo, you may also have: Nausea and vomiting Hearing loss Ringing in your ears (tinnitus) Vision problems, such as a feeling that things are jumping or moving Loss of balance, difficulty standing up Mild dizziness usually gets better by itself, or is easily treated. However, it can be a symptom of other problems. There are many causes. Medicines may cause dizziness, or problems with your ear. Motion sickness can also make you dizzy. Vertigo can be a symptom of many disorders, as well. Some may be chronic, long-term conditions. Some may come and go. Depending on the cause of your vertigo, you may have other symptoms, like benign positional vertigo or Meniere disease . It is important to have your health care provider decide if your vertigo is a sign of a serious problem.

Electronystagmography is a test that looks at eye movements to see how well nerves in the brain are working. These nerves are: Vestibular nerve (eighth cranial nerve), which runs from the brain to the ears Oculomotor nerve, which controls eye movement Trochlear and abducens nerves, which run from the brain to the eyesPatches called electrodes are placed above, below, and on each side of your eyes. They may be sticky patches or attached to a headband. Another patch is attached to the forehead. The health care provider will spray cold water or air into each ear canal at separate times. The patches record eye movements that occur when the inner ear and nearby nerves are stimulated by the water or air. When cold water enters the ear, you should have rapid, side-to-side eye movements called nystagmus. Next, warm water or air is placed into the ear. The eyes should now move rapidly toward the warm water then slowly away. You may also be asked to use your eyes to track objects, such as flashing lights or moving lines. The test takes about 90 minutes.

The Epley maneuver is a series of head movements to relieve symptoms of benign positional vertigo . Benign positional vertigo is also called benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). BPPV is caused by a problem in the inner ear. Vertigo is the feeling that you are spinning or that everything is spinning around you.BPPV occurs when small pieces of bone-like calcium (canaliths) break free and float inside small canals in your inner ear. This sends confusing messages to your brain about your body's position, which causes vertigo. The Epley maneuver is used to move the canaliths out of the canals so they stop causing symptoms. To perform the maneuver, your health care provider will: Turn your head toward the side that causes vertigo. Quickly lay you down on your back with your head in the same position just off the edge of the table. You will likely feel more intense vertigo symptoms at this point. Slowly move your head to the opposite side. Turn your body so that it is in line with your head. You will be lying on your side with your head and body facing to the side. Sit you upright. Your provider may need to repeat these steps a few times.

Labyrinthitis is irritation and swelling of the inner ear. It can cause vertigo and hearing loss.Labyrinthitis is usually caused by a virus and sometimes by bacteria. Having a cold or flu can trigger the condition. Less often, an ear infection may lead to labyrinthitis. Other causes include allergies or certain medicines that are bad for the inner ear. Your inner ear is important for both hearing and balance. When you have labyrinthitis, the parts of your inner ear become irritated and swollen. This can make you lose your balance and cause hearing loss. These factors raise your risk for labyrinthitis: Drinking large amounts of alcohol Fatigue History of allergies Recent viral illness, respiratory infection , or ear infection Smoking Stress Using certain prescription or nonprescription medicines (such as aspirin)

You may have seen your health care provider because you have had labyrinthitis . This inner ear problem can cause you to feel like you are spinning (vertigo). Most of the worst symptoms of vertigo will go away within a week. However, you may feel dizzy at times for another 2 to 3 months.Being dizzy can cause you to lose your balance, fall, and hurt yourself. These tips can help keep symptoms from getting worse and keep you safe: When you feel dizzy, sit down right away. To get up from a lying position, slowly sit up and stay seated for a few moments before standing. When standing, make sure you have something to hold on to. Avoid sudden movements or position changes. You may need a cane or other help walking when symptoms are severe. Avoid bright lights, TV, and reading during a vertigo attack. They may make symptoms worse. Avoid activities such as driving, operating heavy machinery, and climbing while you are having symptoms. Drink water, especially if you have nausea and vomiting. If symptoms continue, ask your provider about balance therapy. Balance therapy includes head, eye, and body exercises you can do at home to help train your brain to overcome dizziness. Symptoms of labyrinthitis can cause stress. Make healthy lifestyle choices to help you cope, such as: Eat a well-balanced, healthy diet. Do not overeat. Exercise regularly, if possible. Get enough sleep. Limit caffeine and alcohol. Help ease stress by using relaxation techniques, such as: Deep breathing Guided imagery Meditation Progressive muscle relaxation Tai chi Yoga Quit smoking

Vertigo is a sensation of motion or spinning that is often described as dizziness. Vertigo is not the same as being lightheaded . People with vertigo feel as though they are actually spinning or moving, or that the world is spinning around them.There are two types of vertigo, peripheral and central vertigo. Peripheral vertigo is due to a problem in the part of the inner ear that controls balance. These areas are called the vestibular labyrinth, or semicircular canals. The problem may also involve the vestibular nerve. This is the nerve between the inner earand the brain stem. Peripheral vertigo may be caused by: Benign positional vertigo (benign paroxysmal positional vertigo, also known as BPPV) Certain medicines, such as aminoglycoside antibiotics, cisplatin, diuretics, or salicylates, which are toxic to the inner ear structures Injury (such as head injury) Inflammation of the vestibular nerve (neuronitis) Irritation and swelling of the inner ear ( labyrinthitis ) Meniere disease Pressure on the vestibular nerve, usually from a noncancerous tumor such as a meningioma or schwannoma Central vertigo is due to a problem in the brain, usually in the brain stem or the back part of the brain (cerebellum). Central vertigo may be caused by: Blood vessel disease Certain drugs, such as anticonvulsants, aspirin, and alcohol Multiple sclerosis Seizures (rarely) Stroke Tumors (cancerous or noncancerous) Vestibular migraine, a type of migraine headache



Meniere's disease is a disorder of the inner ear. It can cause severe dizziness , a roaring sound in your ears called tinnitus , hearing loss that comes and goes and the feeling of ear pressure or pain. It usually affects just one ear. It is a common cause of hearing loss. Attacks of dizziness may come on suddenly or after a short period of tinnitus or muffled hearing. Some people have single attacks of dizziness once in a while. Others may have many attacks close together over several days. Some people with Meniere's disease have "drop attacks" during which the  dizziness is so bad they lose their balance and fall. Scientists don't yet know the cause. They think that it has to do with the fluid levels or the mixing of fluids in the canals of your inner ear.  Doctors diagnose it based on a physical exam and your symptoms. A hearing test can check to see how it has affected your hearing. There is no cure. Treatments include medicines to control dizziness, limiting salt in your diet, and taking water pills. A device that fits into the outer ear and delivers air pulses to the middle ear can help. Severe cases may require surgery. NIH: National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders







When you're short of breath, it's hard or uncomfortable for you to take in the oxygen your body needs. You may feel as if you're not getting enough air. Sometimes you can have mild breathing problems because of a stuffy nose or intense exercise. But shortness of breath can also be a sign of a serious disease. Many conditions can make you feel short of breath: Lung conditions such as asthma , emphysema , or pneumonia Problems with your trachea or bronchi , which are part of your airway system Heart disease can make you feel breathless if your heart cannot pump enough blood to supply oxygen to your body Anxiety and panic attacks Allergies If you often have trouble breathing, it is important to find out the cause.

What is asthma? Asthma is a chronic (long-term) lung disease. It affects your airways, the tubes that carry air in and out of your lungs. When you have asthma, your airways can become inflamed and narrowed. This can cause wheezing, coughing , and tightness in your chest. When these symptoms get worse than usual, it is called an asthma attack or flare-up. What causes asthma? The exact cause of asthma is unknown. Genetics and your environment likely play a role in who gets asthma. An asthma attack can happen when you are exposed to an asthma trigger. An asthma trigger is something that can set off or worsen your asthma symptoms. Different triggers can cause different types of asthma: Allergic asthma is caused by allergens. Allergens are substances that cause an allergic reaction. They can include Dust mites Mold Pets Pollen from grass, trees, and weeds Waste from pests such as cockroaches and mice Nonallergic asthma is caused by triggers that are not allergens, such as Breathing in cold air Certain medicines Household chemicals Infections such as colds and the flu Outdoor air pollution Tobacco smoke Occupational asthma is caused by breathing in chemicals or industrial dusts at work Exercise-induced asthma happens during physical exercise, especially when the air is dry Asthma triggers may be different for each person and can change over time. Who is at risk for asthma? Asthma affects people of all ages, but it often starts during childhood. Certain factors can raise your risk of having asthma: Being exposed to secondhand smoke when your mother is pregnant with you or when you are a small child Being exposed to certain substances at work , such as chemical irritants or industrial dusts Genetics and family history. You are more likely to have asthma if one of your parents has it, especially if it's your mother. Race or ethnicity. Black and African Americans and Puerto Ricans are at higher risk of asthma than people of other races or ethnicities. Having other diseases or conditions such as obesity and allergies Often having viral respiratory infections as a young child Sex. In children, asthma is more common in boys. In teens and adults, it is more common in women. What are the symptoms of asthma? The symptoms of asthma include: Chest tightness Coughing, especially at night or early morning Shortness of breath Wheezing, which causes a whistling sound when you breathe out These symptoms can range from mild to severe. You may have them every day or only once in a while. When you are having an asthma attack, your symptoms get much worse. The attacks may come on gradually or suddenly. Sometimes they can be life-threatening. They are more common in people who have severe asthma. If you are having asthma attacks, you may need a change in your treatment. How is asthma diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to diagnose asthma: Physical exam Medical history Lung function tests , including spirometry, to test how well your lungs work Tests to measure how your airways react to specific exposures. During this test, you inhale different concentrations of allergens or medicines that may tighten the muscles in your airways. Spirometry is done before and after the test. Peak expiratory flow (PEF) tests to measure how fast you can blow air out using maximum effort Fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) tests to measure levels of nitric oxide in your breath when you breathe out. High levels of nitric oxide may mean that your lungs are inflamed. Allergy skin or blood tests, if you have a history of allergies. These tests check which allergens cause a reaction from your immune system. What are the treatments for asthma? If you have asthma, you will work with your health care provider to create a treatment plan. The plan will include ways to manage your asthma symptoms and prevent asthma attacks. It will include: Strategies to avoid triggers. For example, if tobacco smoke is a trigger for you, you should not smoke or allow other people to smoke in your home or car. Short-term relief medicines, also called quick-relief medicines. They help prevent symptoms or relieve symptoms during an asthma attack. They include an inhaler to carry with you all the time. It may also include other types of medicines which work quickly to help open your airways. Control medicines. You take them every day to help prevent symptoms. They work by reducing airway inflammation and preventing narrowing of the airways. If you have a severe attack and the short-term relief medicines do not work, you will need emergency care. Your provider may adjust your treatment until asthma symptoms are controlled. Sometimes asthma is severe and cannot be controlled with other treatments. If you are an adult with uncontrolled asthma, in some cases your provider might suggest bronchial thermoplasty. This is a procedure that uses heat to shrink the smooth muscle in the lungs. Shrinking the muscle reduces your airway's ability to tighten and allows you to breathe more easily. The procedure has some risks, so it's important to discuss them with your provider.

What is emphysema? Emphysema is a type of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). COPD is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. The other main type of COPD is chronic bronchitis . Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. Emphysema affects the air sacs in your lungs. Normally, these sacs are elastic or stretchy. When you breathe in, each air sac fills up with air, like a small balloon. When you breathe out, the air sacs deflate, and the air goes out. In emphysema, the walls between many of the air sacs in the lungs are damaged. This causes the air sacs to lose their shape and become floppy. The damage also can destroy the walls of the air sacs, leading to fewer and larger air sacs instead of many tiny ones. This makes it harder for your lungs to move oxygen in and carbon dioxide out of your body. What causes emphysema? The cause of emphysema is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and the airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause emphysema, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to emphysema. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing emphysema. Who is at risk for emphysema? The risk factors for emphysema include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have emphysema smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace. Age. Most people who have emphysema are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get emphysema are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. What are the symptoms of emphysema? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or wheezing A cough that produces a lot mucus Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Tightness in your chest Some people with emphysema get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, emphysema can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is emphysema diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Other tests tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests What are the treatments for emphysema? There is no cure for emphysema. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat emphysema. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with emphysema are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe emphysema and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling Surgery , usually as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines. There are surgeries to Remove damaged lung tissue Remove large air spaces (bullae) that can form when air sacs are destroyed. The bullae can interfere with breathing. Do a lung transplant . This is might be an option if you have very severe emphysema. If you have emphysema, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can emphysema be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of emphysema, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is pneumonia? Pneumonia is an infection in one or both of the lungs. It causes the air sacs of the lungs to fill up with fluid or pus. It can range from mild to severe, depending on the type of germ causing the infection, your age, and your overall health. What causes pneumonia? Bacterial , viral , and fungal infections can cause pneumonia. Bacteria are the most common cause. Bacterial pneumonia can occur on its own. It can also develop after you've had certain viral infections such as a cold or the flu . Several different types of bacteria can cause pneumonia, including: Streptococcus pneumoniae Legionella pneumophila; this pneumonia is often called Legionnaires' disease Mycoplasma pneumoniae Chlamydia pneumoniae Haemophilus influenzae Viruses that infect the respiratory tract may cause pneumonia. Viral pneumonia is often mild and goes away on its own within a few weeks. But sometimes it is serious enough that you need to get treatment in a hospital. If you have viral pneumonia, you are at risk of also getting bacterial pneumonia. The different viruses that can cause pneumonia include: Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) Some common cold and flu viruses SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes COVID-19 Fungal pneumonia is more common in people who have chronic health problems or weakened immune systems. Some of the types include: Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) Coccidioidomycosis, which causes valley fever Histoplasmosis Cryptococcus Who is at risk for pneumonia? Anyone can get pneumonia, but certain factors can increase your risk: Age; the risk is higher for children who are age 2 and under and adults age 65 and older Exposure to certain chemicals, pollutants, or toxic fumes Lifestyle habits, such as smoking , heavy alcohol use , and malnourishment Being in a hospital, especially if you are in the ICU . Being sedated and/or on a ventilator raises the risk even more. Having a lung disease Having a weakened immune system Have trouble coughing or swallowing , from a stroke or other condition Recently being sick with a cold or the flu What are the symptoms of pneumonia? The symptoms of pneumonia can range from mild to severe and include: Fever Chills Cough, usually with phlegm (a slimy substance from deep in your lungs) Shortness of breath Chest pain when you breathe or cough Nausea and/or vomiting Diarrhea The symptoms can vary for different groups. Newborns and infants may not show any signs of the infection. Others may vomit and have a fever and cough. They might seem sick, with no energy, or be restless. Older adults and people who have serious illnesses or weak immune systems may have fewer and milder symptoms. They may even have a lower than normal temperature. Older adults who have pneumonia sometimes have sudden changes in mental awareness. What other problems can pneumonia cause? Sometimes pneumonia can cause serious complications such as: Bacteremia, which happens when the bacteria move into the bloodstream. It is serious and can lead to septic shock . Lung abscesses , which are collections of pus in cavities of the lungs Pleural disorders , which are conditions that affect the pleura. The pleura is the tissue that covers the outside of the lungs and lines the inside of your chest cavity. Kidney failure Respiratory failure How is pneumonia diagnosed? Sometimes pneumonia can be hard to diagnose. This is because it can cause some of the same symptoms as a cold or the flu. It may take time for you to realize that you have a more serious condition. Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A physical exam, including listening to your lungs with a stethoscope Various tests, such as A chest x-ray Blood tests such as a complete blood count (CBC) to see if your immune system is actively fighting an infection A Blood culture to find out whether you have a bacterial infection that has spread to your bloodstream If you are in the hospital, have serious symptoms, are older, or have other health problems, you may also have more tests, such as: Sputum test, which checks for bacteria in a sample of your sputum (spit) or phlegm (slimy substance from deep in your lungs). Chest CT scan to see how much of your lungs is affected. It may also show if you have complications such as lung abscesses or pleural effusions. Pleural fluid culture , which checks for bacteria in a fluid sample that was taken from the pleural space Pulse oximetry or blood oxygen level test, to check how much oxygen is in your blood Bronchoscopy, a procedure used to look inside your lungs' airways What are the treatments for pneumonia? Treatment for pneumonia depends on the type of pneumonia, which germ is causing it, and how severe it is: Antibiotics treat bacterial pneumonia and some types of fungal pneumonia. They do not work for viral pneumonia. In some cases, your provider may prescribe antiviral medicines for viral pneumonia Antifungal medicines treat other types of fungal pneumonia You may need to be treated in a hospital if your symptoms are severe or if you are at risk for complications. While there, you may get additional treatments. For example, if your blood oxygen level is low, you may receive oxygen therapy . It may take time to recover from pneumonia. Some people feel better within a week. For other people, it can take a month or more. Can pneumonia be prevented? Vaccines can help prevent pneumonia caused by pneumococcal bacteria or the flu virus . Having good hygiene , not smoking, and having a healthy lifestyle may also help prevent pneumonia. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Your trachea, or windpipe, is one part of your airway system. Airways are pipes that carry oxygen-rich air to your lungs. They also carry carbon dioxide, a waste gas, out of your lungs. When you inhale, air travels from your nose, through your larynx, and down your windpipe. The windpipe splits into two bronchi that enter your lungs. Problems with the trachea include narrowing, inflammation, and some inherited conditions.  You may need a procedure called a tracheostomy to help you breathe if you have swallowing problems, or have conditions that affect coughing or block your airways.  You might also need a tracheostomy if you are in critical care and need to be on a breathing machine. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

When you breathe in, the air travels down through your trachea (windpipe). It then goes through two tubes to your lungs. These tubes are your bronchi. Bronchial disorders can make it hard for you to breathe. The most common problem with the bronchi is bronchitis, an inflammation of the tubes. It can be acute or chronic . Other problems include: Bronchiectasis - a condition in which damage to the airways causes them to widen and become flabby and scarred Exercise-induced bronchospasm - a breathing problem that happens when your airways shrink while you are exercising Bronchiolitis - an inflammation of the small airways that branch off from the bronchi Bronchopulmonary dysplasia - a chronic lung condition in infants, most often premature infants







An allergy is a reaction by your immune system to something that does not bother most other people. People who have allergies often are sensitive to more than one thing. Substances that often cause reactions are: Pollen Dust mites Mold spores Pet dander Food Insect stings Medicines Normally, your immune system fights germs. It is your body's defense system. In most allergic reactions, however, it is responding to a false alarm. Genes and the environment probably both play a role. Allergies can cause a variety of symptoms such as a runny nose, sneezing, itching, rashes , swelling, or asthma . Allergies can range from minor to severe. Anaphylaxis is a severe reaction that can be life-threatening.   Doctors use skin and blood tests to diagnose allergies. Treatments include medicines, allergy shots, and avoiding the substances that cause the reactions.



Blood gasesare a measurement of how much oxygen and carbon dioxideare in your blood.They also determine the acidity (pH) of your blood.Usually, blood is taken from an artery. In some cases, blood from a vein may be used (venous blood gas). Most commonly, blood may be collected from one of the following arteries: Radial artery in the wrist Femoral artery in the groin Brachial artery in the arm The health care provider may test circulation to the hand before taking a sample of blood from the wrist area. The provider inserts a small needle through the skin into the artery. The sample is quickly sent to a laboratory for analysis.

Some children have breath-holding spells. This is an involuntary stop in breathing that is not in the child's control.Babies as young as 2 months old and up to 2 years old can start having breath-holding spells. Some children have severe spells. Children can have breath-holding spells when they are responding to: Fear Pain Traumatic event Being startled or confronted Breath-holding spells are more common in children with: Genetic conditions, such as Riley-Day syndrome or Rett syndrome Iron deficiency anemia A family history of breath-holding spells (parents may have had similar spells when they were children)

Breath sounds are the noises produced by the structures of the lungs during breathing.The breath sounds are best heard with a stethoscope. This is called auscultation. Normal breath sounds occur in all parts of the chest area, including above the collarbones and at the bottom of the rib cage. Using a stethoscope, the doctor may hear normal breathing sounds, decreased or absent breath sounds, and abnormal breath sounds. Absent or decreased sounds can mean: Air or fluid in or around the lungs (such as pneumonia , heart failure , and pleural effusion ) Increased thickness of the chest wall Over-inflation of a part of the lungs ( emphysema can cause this) Reduced airflow to part of the lungs There are several types of abnormal breath sounds. The 4 most common are: Rales. Small clicking, bubbling, or rattling sounds in the lungs. They are heard when a person breathes in (inhales). They are believed to occur when air opens closed air spaces. Rales can be further described as moist, dry, fine, or coarse. Rhonchi. Sounds that resemble snoring. They occur when air is blocked or air flow becomes rough through the large airways. Stridor. Wheeze-like sound heard when a person breathes. Usually it is due to a blockage of airflow in the windpipe (trachea) or in the back of the throat. Wheezing. High-pitched sounds produced by narrowed airways. Wheezing and other abnormal sounds can sometimes be heard without a stethoscope.



Breathing that stops from any cause is called apnea. Slowed breathing is called bradypnea. Labored or difficult breathing is known as dyspnea.Apnea can come and go and be temporary. This can occur with obstructive sleep apnea, for example. Prolonged apnea means a person has stopped breathing. If the heart is still active, the condition is known as respiratory arrest. This is a life-threatening event that requires immediate medical attention and first aid. Prolonged apnea with no heart activity in a person who is not responsive is called cardiac (or cardiopulmonary) arrest. In infants and children, the most common cause of cardiac arrest is respiratory arrest. In adults, the opposite usually occurs, cardiac arrest most often leads to respiratory arrest.

Most people take breathing for granted. People with certain illnesses may have breathing problems that they deal with on a regular basis. This article discusses first aid for someone who is having unexpected breathing problems. Breathing difficulties can range from: Being short of breath Being unable to take a deep breath and gasping for air Feeling like you are not getting enough airBreathing difficulty is almost always a medical emergency. An exception is feeling slightly winded from normal activity, such as exercise.

Breathing difficulty may involve: Difficult breathing Uncomfortable breathing Feeling like you are not getting enough airThere is no standard definition for difficulty breathing. Some people feel breathless with only mild exercise (for example, climbing stairs), even though they don't have a medical condition. Others may have advanced lung disease, but may never feel short of breath. Breathing difficulty is a subjective feeling; only the person feeling it can decide if it is present. Wheezing is one form of breathing difficulty in which you make a high-pitched sound when you breathe out.

Breathing difficulty while lying down is an abnormal condition in which a person has a problem breathing normally when lying flat. The head must be raised by sitting or standing to be able to breathe deeply or comfortably. A type of breathing difficulty while lying down is paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. This condition causes a person to wake up suddenly during the night feeling short of breath.This is a common complaint in people with some types of heart or lung problems. Sometimes the problem is subtle. People may only notice it when they realize that sleep is more comfortable with lots of pillows under their head, or their head in a propped-up position.

Bronchiectasis is a disease in which the large airways in the lungs are damaged. This causes the airways to become permanently wider. Bronchiectasis can be present at birth or infancy or develop later in life.Bronchiectasis is often caused by inflammation or infection of the airways that keeps coming back. Sometimes it begins in childhood after having a severe lung infection or inhaling a foreign object . Breathing in food particles can also lead to this condition. Other causes of bronchiectasis can include: Cystic fibrosis , a disease that causes thick, sticky mucus to build up in the lungs Autoimmune disorders, such as rheumatoid arthritis or Sjgren syndrome Allergic lung diseases Leukemia and related cancers Immune deficiency syndromes Primary ciliary dyskinesia (another congenital disease) Infection with non-tuberculous mycobacteria

Bronchoscopy is a test to view the airways and diagnose lung disease. It may also be used during the treatment of some lung conditions.A bronchoscope is a device used to see the inside of the airways and lungs. The scope can be flexible or rigid. A flexible scope is almost always used. It is a tube less than one half inch (1 centimeter) wide and about 2 feet (60 centimeters) long. In rare cases, a rigid bronchoscope is used. You will likely get medicines through a vein (IV, or intravenously) to help you relax. Or, you may be asleep under general anesthesia , especially if a rigid scope is used. A numbing drug (anesthetic) will be sprayed in your mouth and throat. If bronchoscopy is done through your nose, numbing jelly will be placed in the nostril the tube goes through. The scope is gently inserted. It will likely make you cough at first. The coughing will stop as the numbing drug begins to work. Your health care provider may send saline solution through the tube. This washes the lungs and allows your provider to collect samples of lung cells, fluids, microbes and other materials inside the air sacs. This part of the procedure is called a lavage. Sometimes, tiny brushes, needles, or forceps may be passed through the bronchoscope to take very small tissue samples (biopsies) from your lungs. Your provider can also place a stent in your airway or view your lungs with ultrasound during the procedure. A stent is a small tube-like medical device. Ultrasound is a painless imaging method that allows your provider to see inside your body. Sometimes ultrasound is used to see the lymph nodes and tissues around your airways. At the end of the procedure, the scope is removed.

A chest CT (computed tomography) scan is an imaging method that uses x-rays to create cross-sectional pictures of the chest and upper abdomen.The test is done in the following way: You'll likely be asked to change into a hospital gown. You lie on a narrow table that slides into the center of the scanner. Once you are inside the scanner, the machine's x-ray beam rotates around you. You must be still during the exam, because movement causes blurred images. You may be told to hold your breath for short period of time. The complete scan takes 30 seconds to a few minutes. Certain CT scans require a special dye, called contrast, to be delivered into the body before the test starts. Contrast highlights specific areas inside the body and creates a clearer image. If your provider requests a CT scan with intravenous contrast, you will be given it through a vein (IV) in your arm or hand. A blood test to measure your kidney function may be done before the test. This test is to make sure your kidneys are healthy enough to filter the contrast. You may be given medicine to help you relax during the test.



A home apnea monitor is a machine used to monitor a baby's heart rate and breathing after coming home from the hospital. Apnea is breathing that slows down or stops from any cause. An alarm on the monitor goes off when your baby's heart rate or breathing slows or stops. The monitor is small and portable.A monitor may be needed when: Your baby has ongoing apnea Your baby has severe reflux Your baby needs to be on oxygen or a breathing machine The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that home monitors should not be used to reduce the risk of sudden infant death syndrome ( SIDS ). Babies should be put on their backs or sides to sleep to reduce the chance of SIDS.

Pursed lip breathing helps you use less energy to breathe. It can help you relax. When you are short of breath, it helps you slow the pace of your breathing and can help you feel less short of breath. Use pursed lip breathing when you do things that make you short of breath, such as: Exercise Bend Lift Climb stairs Feel anxious You can practice pursed lip breathing anytime. Try to practice 4 or 5 times a day when you: Watch TV Use your computer Read a newspaperThe steps to do pursed lip breathing are: Relax the muscles in your neck and shoulders. Sit in a comfortable chair with your feet on the floor. Inhale slowly through your nose for 2 counts. Feel your belly get larger as you breathe in. Pucker your lips, as if you were going to whistle or blow out a candle. Exhale slowly through your lips for 4 or more counts. Exhale normally. DO NOT force the air out. DO NOT hold your breath when you are doing pursed lip breathing. Repeat these steps until your breathing slows.



Intercostal retractions occur when the muscles between the ribs pull inward. The movement is most often a sign that the person has a breathing problem. Intercostal retractions are a medical emergency.The wall of your chest is flexible. This helps you breathenormally. Stiff tissue called cartilage attaches your ribs to the breast bone (sternum). The intercostal muscles are the muscles between the ribs. During breathing, these muscles normally tighten and pull the rib cage up. Your chest expands and the lungs fill with air. Intercostal retractions are due to reduced air pressure inside your chest. This can happen if the upper airway (trachea) or small airways of the lungs (bronchioles) become partially blocked. As a result, the intercostal muscles are sucked inward, between the ribs, when you breathe. This is a sign of a blocked airway . Any health problem that causes a blockage in the airwaywill cause intercostal retractions.

Nasal flaring occurs when the nostrils widen while breathing. It is often a sign of trouble breathing.Nasal flaring is seen mostly in infants and younger children. Any condition that causes difficulty breathing can cause nasal flaring. Many causes of nasal flaring are not serious, but some can be life threatening. In young infants, nasal flaring can be a sign of respiratory distress . This is a serious lung condition that prevents enough oxygen from getting to the lungs and into the blood.

Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) is a condition in some obese people in which poor breathing leads to lower oxygen and higher carbon dioxide levels in the blood.The exact cause of OHS is not known. Researchers believe OHS results from a defect in the brain's control over breathing. Excess weight against the chest wall also makes it harder for the muscles to draw in a deep breath and to breathe quickly enough. This worsens the brain's breathing control. As a result, the blood contains too much carbon dioxide and not enough oxygen.

Someone who is very ill may have trouble breathing or feel as if they are not getting enough air. This condition is called shortness of breath. The medical term for this is dyspnea.Palliative care is a holistic approach to care that focuses on treating pain and symptoms and improving quality of life in people with serious illnesses and a limited life span.

Primary alveolar hypoventilation is a rare disorder in which a person does not take enough breaths per minute. The lungs and airways are normal.Normally, when the oxygen level in the bloodis low or the carbon dioxide level ishigh, there is a signal from the brain to breathe more deeply or quickly. In people with primary alveolar hypoventilation, this change in breathing does not happen. The cause of this condition is unknown. Some people have a specific genetic defect. The disease mainly affects men 20 to 50 years old. It may also occur in children.

Pulmonary function tests are a group of tests that measure breathing and how well the lungs are functioning.Spirometry measures airflow. By measuring how much air you exhale, and how quickly you exhale, spirometry can evaluate a broad range of lung diseases. In a spirometry test, while you are sitting, you breathe into a mouthpiece that is connected to an instrument called a spirometer. The spirometer records the amount and the rate of air that you breathe in and out over a period of time. When standing, some numbers might be slightly different. For some of the test measurements, you can breathe normally and quietly. Other tests require forced inhalation or exhalation after a deep breath. Sometimes, you will be asked to inhale a different gas or a medicine to see how it changes your test results. Lung volume measurement can be done in two ways: The most accurate way is called body plethysmography. You sit in a clear airtight box that looks like a phone booth. The technologist asks you to breathe in and out of a mouthpiece. Changes in pressure inside the box help determine the lung volume. Lung volume can also be measured when you breathe nitrogen or helium gas through a tube for a certain period of time. The concentration of the gas in a chamber attached to the tube is measured to estimate the lung volume. To measure diffusion capacity , you breathe a harmless gas, called a tracer gas, for a very short time, often for only one breath. The concentration of the gas in the air you breathe out is measured. The difference in the amount of gas inhaled and exhaled measures how effectively gas travels from the lungs into the blood. This test allows the health care provider to estimate how well the lungs move oxygen from the air into the bloodstream.

A normal breathing rate for an adult at rest is 8 to 16 breaths per minute. For an infant, a normal rate is up to 44 breaths per minute. Tachypnea is the term that your health care provider uses to describe your breathing if it is too fast, especially if you have fast, shallow breathing from a lung disease or other medical cause. The term hyperventilation is usually used if you are taking rapid, deep breaths. This can be due to lung disease or because of anxiety or panic. The terms are sometimes used interchangeably.Shallow, rapid breathing has many possible medical causes, including: Asthma Blood clot in an artery in the lung Choking Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) and other chronic lung diseases Heart failure Infection in the smallest air passages of the lungs in children ( bronchiolitis ) Pneumonia or other lung infection Transient tachypnea of the newborn Anxiety and panic Other serious lung disease, such as interstitial lung disease or bronchiectasis

Stridor is an abnormal, high-pitched, musical breathing sound. It is caused by a blockage in the throat or voice box (larynx). It is most often heard when taking in a breath.Children are at higher risk of airway blockage because they have narrower airways than adults. In young children, stridor is a sign of airway blockage. It must be treated right away to prevent the airway from becoming completely closed. The airway can be blocked by an object, swollen tissues of the throat or upper airway, or a spasm of the airway muscles or the vocal cords.

Acquired tracheomalacia is a weakness and floppiness of the walls of the windpipe (trachea, or airway). It develops after birth. Congenital tracheomalacia is a related topic.Acquired tracheomalacia is very uncommon at any age. It occurs when normal cartilage in the wall of the windpipe begins to break down. This form of tracheomalacia may result: When large blood vessels put pressure on the airway As a complication after surgery to repair birth defects in the windpipe and esophagus (the tube that carries food from the mouth to the stomach) After having a breathing tube or trachea tube (tracheostomy) for a long time

Congenital tracheomalacia is weakness and floppiness of the walls of the windpipe (trachea). Congenital means it is present at birth. Acquired tracheomalacia is a related topic.Tracheomalacia in a newborn occurs when the cartilage in the windpipe has not developed properly. Instead of being rigid, the walls of the trachea are floppy. Because the windpipe is the main airway, breathing problems begin soon after birth. Congenital tracheomalacia is very uncommon.

Transient tachypnea of the newborn (TTN) is a breathing disorder seen shortly after delivery in early term or late preterm babies. Transient means it is short-lived (most often less than 48 hours). Tachypnea means rapid breathing (faster than most newborns, who normally breathe 40 to 60 times per minute).As the baby grows in the womb, the lungs make a special fluid. This fluid fills the baby's lungs and helps them grow. When the baby is born at term, hormones released during labor tell the lungs to stop making this special fluid. The baby's lungs start removing or reabsorbing it. The first few breaths a baby takes after delivery fill the lungs with air and help to clear most of the remaining lung fluid. Leftover fluid in the lungs causes the baby to breathe rapidly. It is harder for the small air sacs of the lungs to stay open. TTN is more likely to occur in babies who were: Born before 38 completed weeks gestation (early term) Delivered by C-section, especially if labor has not already started Born to a mother with diabetes or asthma Twins Male sex

If you have breathing problems such as asthma or COPD, you can travel safely if you take a few precautions.It's easier to stay healthy while traveling if you are in good health before you go. Before traveling, you should talk with your health care provider if you have breathing problems and you: Are short of breath most of the time Get short of breath when you walk 150 feet (45 meters) or less Have been in the hospital for breathing problems recently Use oxygen at home, even if just at night or with exercise Also talk with your provider if you were in the hospital for your breathing problems and had: Pneumonia Chest surgery A collapsed lung Check with your provider if you plan to travel in a place at a high altitude (such as states like Colorado or Utah and countries like Peru or Ecuador).

The inside walls of the nose have 3 pairs of long thin bones covered with a layer of tissue that can expand. These bones are called nasal turbinates. Allergies or other nasal problems can cause the turbinates to swell and block airflow. Surgery can be done to fix blocked airways and improve your breathing.There are several types of turbinate surgery: Turbinectomy: All or part of the lower turbinate is taken out. This can be done in several different ways, but sometimes a tiny, high-speed device (microdebrider) is used to shave off the extra tissue. The surgery may be done through a lighted camera (endoscope) that is placed into the nose. You may have general anesthesia or local anesthesia with sedation, so you are asleep and pain-free during surgery. Turbinoplasty: A tool is placed in the nose to change the position of the turbinate. This is called the outfracture technique. Some of the tissue may also be shaved off. You may have general anesthesia or local anesthesia with sedation, so you are asleep and pain-free during surgery. Radiofrequency or laser ablation: A thin probe is placed into the nose. Laser light or radiofrequency energy goes through this tube and shrinks the turbinate tissue. The procedure can be done in the health care provider's office using local anesthesia.

Wheezing is a high-pitched whistling sound during breathing. It occurs when air moves through narrowed breathing tubes in the lungs.Wheezing is a sign that a person may be having breathing problems. The sound of wheezing is most obvious when breathing out (exhaling). It may also be heard when breathing in (inhaling). Wheezing most often comes from the small breathing tubes (bronchial tubes) deep in the lungs. But it may be due to a blockage in larger airways or in people with certain vocal cord problems.

Bronchitis is an inflammation of the bronchial tubes, the airways that carry air to your lungs. It causes a cough that often brings up mucus. It can also cause shortness of breath, wheezing, a low fever, and chest tightness. There are two main types of bronchitis: acute and chronic . Most cases of acute bronchitis get better within several days. But your cough can last for several weeks after the infection is gone. The same viruses that cause colds and the flu often cause acute bronchitis. These viruses spread through the air when people cough, or though physical contact (for example, on unwashed hands). Being exposed to tobacco smoke, air pollution, dusts, vapors, and fumes can also cause acute bronchitis. Less often, bacteria can also cause acute bronchitis. To diagnose acute bronchitis, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and listen to your breathing. You may also have other tests. Treatments include rest, fluids, and aspirin (for adults) or acetaminophen to treat fever. A humidifier or steam can also help. You may need inhaled medicine to open your airways if you are wheezing. Antibiotics won't help if the cause is viral. You may get antibiotics if the cause is bacterial. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute





What is chronic bronchitis? Chronic bronchitis is a type of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). COPD is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. The other main type of COPD is emphysema . Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. Chronic bronchitis is inflammation (swelling) and irritation of the bronchial tubes. These tubes are the airways that carry air to and from the air sacs in your lungs. The irritation of the tubes causes mucus to build up. This mucus and the swelling of the tubes make it harder for your lungs to move oxygen in and carbon dioxide out of your body. What causes chronic bronchitis? The cause of chronic bronchitis is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause chronic bronchitis, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to chronic bronchitis. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing chronic bronchitis. Who is at risk for chronic bronchitis? The risk factors for chronic bronchitis include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have chronic bronchitis smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace. Age. Most people who have chronic bronchitis are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get chronic bronchitis are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. What are the symptoms of chronic bronchitis? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or a cough that produces a lot mucus Wheezing A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity Tightness in your chest Some people with chronic bronchitis get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, chronic bronchitis can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is chronic bronchitis diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Various tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests What are the treatments for chronic bronchitis? There is no cure for chronic bronchitis. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat chronic bronchitis. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with chronic bronchitis are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases. Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe chronic bronchitis and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling A lung transplant , as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines If you have chronic bronchitis, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can chronic bronchitis be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of chronic bronchitis, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) is a group of lung diseases that make it hard to breathe and get worse over time. Normally, the airways and air sacs in your lungs are elastic or stretchy. When you breathe in, the airways bring air to the air sacs. The air sacs fill up with air, like a small balloon. When you breathe out, the air sacs deflate, and the air goes out. If you have COPD, less air flows in and out of your airways because of one or more problems: The airways and air sacs in your lungs become less elastic The walls between many of the air sacs are destroyed The walls of the airways become thick and inflamed The airways make more mucus than usual and can become clogged What are the types of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? COPD includes two main types: Emphysema affects the air sacs in your lungs, as well as the walls between them. They become damaged and are less elastic. Chronic bronchitis , in which the lining of your airways is constantly irritated and inflamed. This causes the lining to swell and make mucus. Most people with COPD have both emphysema and chronic bronchitis, but how severe each type is can be different from person to person. What causes COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? The cause of COPD is usually long-term exposure to irritants that damage your lungs and airways. In the United States, cigarette smoke is the main cause. Pipe, cigar, and other types of tobacco smoke can also cause COPD, especially if you inhale them. Exposure to other inhaled irritants can contribute to COPD. These include secondhand smoke , air pollution , and chemical fumes or dusts from the environment or workplace. Rarely, a genetic condition called alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency can play a role in causing COPD. Who is at risk for COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? The risk factors for COPD include: Smoking. This the main risk factor. Up to 75% of people who have COPD smoke or used to smoke. Long-term exposure to other lung irritants , such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, and chemical fumes and dusts from the environment or workplace Age. Most people who have COPD are at least 40 years old when their symptoms begin. Genetics. This includes alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, which is a genetic condition. Also, smokers who get COPD are more likely to get it if they have a family history of COPD. Asthma. People who have asthma have more risk of developing COPD than people who don't have asthma. But most people with asthma will not get COPD. What are the symptoms of COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? At first, you may have no symptoms or only mild symptoms. As the disease gets worse, your symptoms usually become more severe. They can include: Frequent coughing or a cough that produces a lot mucus Wheezing A whistling or squeaky sound when you breathe Shortness of breath, especially with physical activity Tightness in your chest Some people with COPD get frequent respiratory infections such as colds and the flu . In severe cases, COPD can cause weight loss, weakness in your lower muscles, and swelling in your ankles, feet, or legs. How is COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) diagnosed? Your health care provider may use many tools to make a diagnosis: A medical history, which includes asking about your symptoms A family history Various tests, such as lung function tests , a chest x-ray or CT scan , and blood tests Your doctor will diagnose COPD based on your signs and symptoms, your medical and family histories, and test results. What are the treatments for COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)? There is no cure for COPD. However, treatments can help with symptoms, slow the progress of the disease, and improve your ability to stay active. There are also treatments to prevent or treat complications of the disease. Treatments include: Lifestyle changes , such as Quitting smoking if you are a smoker. This is the most important step you can take to treat COPD. Avoiding secondhand smoke and places where you might breathe in other lung irritants Ask your health care provider for an eating plan that will meet your nutritional needs. Also ask about how much physical activity you can do. Physical activity can strengthen the muscles that help you breathe and improve your overall wellness. Medicines , such as Bronchodilators, which relax the muscles around your airways. This helps open your airways and makes breathing easier. Most bronchodilators are taken through an inhaler. In more severe cases, the inhaler may also contain steroids to reduce inflammation. Vaccines for the flu and pneumococcal pneumonia, since people with COPD are at higher risk for serious problems from these diseases Antibiotics if you get a bacterial or viral lung infection Oxygen therapy , if you have severe COPD and low levels of oxygen in your blood. Oxygen therapy can help you breathe better. You may need extra oxygen all the time or only at certain times. Pulmonary rehabilitation , which is a program that helps improve the well-being of people who have chronic breathing problems. It may include An exercise program Disease management training Nutritional counseling Psychological counseling Surgery , usually as a last resort for people who have severe symptoms that have not gotten better with medicines: For COPD that is mainly related to emphysema, there are surgeries that Remove damaged lung tissue Remove large air spaces (bullae) that can form when air sacs are destroyed. The bullae can interfere with breathing. For severe COPD, some people may need lung transplant If you have COPD, it's important to know when and where to get help for your symptoms. You should get emergency care if you have severe symptoms, such as trouble catching your breath or talking. Call your health care provider if your symptoms are getting worse or if you have signs of an infection, such as a fever . Can COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) be prevented? Since smoking causes most cases of COPD, the best way to prevent it is to not smoke. It's also important to try to avoid lung irritants such as secondhand smoke, air pollution, chemical fumes, and dusts. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Heart failure is a condition in which the heart can't pump enough blood to meet the body's needs. Heart failure does not mean that your heart has stopped or is about to stop working. It means that your heart is not able to pump blood the way it should. It can affect one or both sides of the heart. The weakening of the heart's pumping ability causes: Blood and fluid to back up into the lungs The buildup of fluid in the feet, ankles and legs - called edema Tiredness and shortness of breath Common causes of heart failure are coronary artery disease , high blood pressure and diabetes . It is more common in people who are 65 years old or older, African Americans, people who are overweight, and people who have had a heart attack. Men have a higher rate of heart failure than women. Your doctor will diagnose heart failure by doing a physical exam and heart tests. Treatment includes treating the underlying cause of your heart failure, medicines, and heart transplantation if other treatments fail. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

When you breathe, your lungs take in oxygen from the air and deliver it to the bloodstream. The cells in your body need oxygen to work and grow.  During a normal day, you breathe nearly 25,000 times. People with lung disease have difficulty breathing. Millions of people in the U.S. have lung disease. If all types of lung disease are lumped together, it is the number three killer in the United States. The term lung disease refers to many disorders affecting the lungs, such as asthma , COPD , infections like influenza , pneumonia and tuberculosis , lung cancer , and many other breathing problems . Some lung diseases can lead to respiratory failure . Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Sleep apnea is a common disorder that causes your breathing to stop or get very shallow. Breathing pauses can last from a few seconds to minutes. They may occur 30 times or more an hour. The most common type is obstructive sleep apnea. It causes your airway to collapse or become blocked during sleep. Normal breathing starts again with a snort or choking sound. People with sleep apnea often snore loudly. However, not everyone who snores has sleep apnea. You are more at risk for sleep apnea if you are overweight, male, or have a family history or small airways.  Children with enlarged tonsils or adenoids may also get it. Doctors diagnose sleep apnea based on medical and family histories, a physical exam, and sleep study results. When your sleep is interrupted throughout the night, you can be drowsy during the day. People with sleep apnea are at higher risk for car crashes, work-related accidents, and other medical problems. If you have it, it is important to get treatment. Lifestyle changes, mouthpieces, surgery, and breathing devices can treat sleep apnea in many people. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute











What are antidepressants? Antidepressants are prescription medicines to treat depression. Depression is more than feeling a little sad or "blue" for a few days. It's a very common, serious medical illness that affects your mood and general mental health It can make you feel tired, hopeless, worried, or fearful. It can change your thinking, sleeping, and eating. Depression may make some people think about ending their lives. But antidepressants can help many people who have depression. Researchers think antidepressants may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. Are antidepressants used for other conditions? A health care provider may prescribe antidepressants for anxiety , chronic pain , or insomnia . Sometimes providers also prescribe antidepressants for other conditions. What are the different types of antidepressants? There are many types of antidepressants. Each one works differently. Providers usually prescribe newer antidepressants first because they don't cause as many side effects as older types. They also seem to help more kinds of depression and anxiety problems. Most of the newer antidepressants belong to one of these three groups: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) Atypical antidepressants, which are newer antidepressants that don't fit into the other groups If these antidepressants don't help, your provider might suggest one of the older antidepressants. The older types include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Even though these antidepressants may cause more serious side effects, the benefits may outweigh the risks for some people. Which type of antidepressant is right for me? Our bodies and brains all work differently. That means one antidepressant won't work for everyone.  You may need to try two or more medicines before you find one that works for you. Your provider will work with you to choose the best option to try first. You'll consider questions such as: Which symptoms bother you most? Some antidepressants may do a better job helping specific symptoms, such as trouble sleeping. What other medicines and supplements do you take? Some antidepressants can cause problems if you take them with certain medicines and herbs. Did a certain antidepressant work well for a close relative? An antidepressant that helped a parent, brother, or sister could be a good choice for you, too. Do you have other health conditions? Certain antidepressants can make some other conditions better or worse. Any other conditions that you have will be part of choosing your depression treatment. Are you pregnant, planning for pregnancy, or breastfeeding? If so, your provider will help you find a way to treat your depression that's safe for you and your baby. How long do antidepressants take to work? Antidepressants usually take 4 to 8 weeks to work, so you'll need to be patient. You may notice that some problems, such as sleeping and eating, get better before your mood improves. That's a good sign. You may just need to give the medicine a little more time to do its job. Sometimes an antidepressant helps at first, but symptoms return while you're still taking it. But there's usually another one you can try. To get more relief from depression, your provider may suggest combining two antidepressants, using another kind of medicine with an antidepressant, or adding talk therapy or other approaches to improve your mental health . How long will I need to take an antidepressant? When an antidepressant starts to work, you and your provider can decide how long you need to stay on it. The typical length of treatment is 6 to 12 months, but some people may stay on antidepressants for much longer. What are the side effects of antidepressants? Not everyone has side effects from antidepressants. But if you do have them, they're usually mild and may get better over time as your body gets used to the new medicine. The most common side effects from antidepressants include: Nausea and vomiting Weight gain Diarrhea Sleepiness Sexual problems, such as a lack of desire or ability to have sex When thinking about side effects, it's important to remember that there are also risks from not treating depression. Your provider can help you think through the pros and cons of all your options. If you have any side effects from antidepressants, your provider may suggest ways to manage them while you wait to see if the antidepressant will work. If the side effects bother you too much, you may need to change antidepressants. But you should never change your dose or stop taking an antidepressant on your own. If you have serious problems or notice any changes that worry you, such as new or worsening symptoms, unusual changes in your mood, or you start acting differently, call your provider right away. In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may be more likely to think about hurting or killing themselves when starting antidepressants or when the dose is changed. Get medical help right away if this happens. What can I do to take antidepressants safely? Antidepressants are generally safe when you use them correctly: Tell your provider about everything you take. That includes medicines, herbs, supplements, and over-the-counter medicines you take, such as pain relievers and decongestants. Be honest about recreational drugs and alcohol, too. Try to get all your medicines from the same pharmacy. That way the pharmacist can warn you and your provider if you take medicines that may cause problems when used together. Follow all instructions about how to take your medicine. Talk with your provider if side effects bother you. Never stop taking antidepressants without your provider's help. Stopping too fast may make depression come back. You could even make your condition worse. To stop antidepressants safely, you need to give your body time to get used to being without the medicine. Your provider can tell you the safest way to go off an antidepressant. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health







Pain is a signal in your nervous system that something may be wrong.  It is an unpleasant feeling, such as a prick, tingle, sting, burn, or ache. Pain may be sharp or dull. You may feel pain in one area of your body, or all over.  There are two types: acute pain and chronic pain. Acute pain lets you know that you may be injured or a have problem you need to take care of. Chronic pain is different.  The pain may last for weeks, months, or even years. The original cause may have been an injury or infection. There may be an ongoing cause of pain, such as arthritis or cancer. In some cases there is no clear cause. Environmental and psychological factors can make chronic pain worse. Many older adults have chronic pain. Women also report having more chronic pain than men, and they are at a greater risk for many pain conditions. Some people have two or more chronic pain conditions. Chronic pain is not always curable, but treatments can help. There are drug treatments, including pain relievers . There are also non-drug treatments , such as acupuncture , physical therapy, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke





What are nausea and vomiting? Nausea is when you feel sick to your stomach, as if you are going to throw up. Vomiting is when you throw up. What causes nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting can be symptoms of many different conditions, including: Morning sickness during pregnancy Gastroenteritis (infection of your intestines) and other infections Migraines Motion sickness Food poisoning Medicines, including those for cancer chemotherapy GERD (reflux) and ulcers Intestinal obstruction When do I need to see a health care provider for nausea and vomiting? Nausea and vomiting are common. They are usually not serious. However, you should contact your health care provider immediately if you have: A reason to think that your vomiting is from poisoning Vomited for longer than 24 hours Blood in the vomit Severe abdominal pain Severe headache and stiff neck Signs of dehydration , such as dry mouth, infrequent urination or dark urine How is the cause of nausea and vomiting diagnosed? Your health care provider will take your medical history, ask about your symptoms and do a physical exam. The provider will look for signs of dehydration. You may have some tests, including blood and urine tests. Women may also have a pregnancy test. What are the treatments for nausea and vomiting? Treatments for nausea and vomiting depend on the cause. You may get treatment for the underlying problem. There are some medicines that can treatment nausea and vomiting. For severe cases of vomiting, you may need extra fluids through an IV (intravenous). There are things that you can do to feel better: Get enough fluids, to avoid dehydration. If you are having trouble keeping liquids down, drink small amounts of clear liquids often. Eat bland foods; stay away from spicy, fatty, or salty foods Eat smaller meals more often Avoid strong smells, since they can sometimes trigger nausea and vomiting If you are pregnant and have morning sickness, eat crackers before you get out of bed in the morning

What is diarrhea? Diarrhea is loose, watery stools (bowel movements). You have diarrhea if you have loose stools three or more times in one day. Acute diarrhea is diarrhea that lasts a short time. It is a common problem.  It usually lasts about one or two days, but it may last longer. Then it goes away on its own. Diarrhea lasting more than a few days may be a sign of a more serious problem. Chronic diarrhea -- diarrhea that lasts at least four weeks -- can be a symptom of a chronic disease. Chronic diarrhea symptoms may be continual, or they may come and go. What causes diarrhea? The most common causes of diarrhea include: Bacteria from contaminated food or water Viruses such as the flu , norovirus , or rotavirus . Rotavirus is the most common cause of acute diarrhea in children. Parasites, which are tiny organisms found in contaminated food or water Medicines such as antibiotics, cancer drugs, and antacids that contain magnesium Food intolerances and sensitivities, which are problems digesting certain ingredients or foods. An example is lactose intolerance . Diseases that affect the stomach, small intestine, or colon, such as Crohn's disease Problems with how the colon functions, such as irritable bowel syndrome Some people also get diarrhea after stomach surgery, because sometimes the surgeries can cause food to move through your digestive system more quickly. Sometimes no cause can be found. If your diarrhea goes away within a few days, finding the cause is usually not necessary. Who is at risk for diarrhea? People of all ages can get diarrhea. On average, adults In the United States have acute diarrhea once a year. Young children have it an average of twice a year. People who visit developing countries are at risk for traveler's diarrhea . It is caused by consuming contaminated food or water. What other symptoms might I have with diarrhea? Other possible symptoms of diarrhea include: Cramps or pain in the abdomen An urgent need to use the bathroom Loss of bowel control If a virus or bacteria is the cause of your diarrhea, you may also have a fever, chills, and bloody stools. Diarrhea can cause dehydration , which means that your body does not have enough fluid to work properly. Dehydration can be serious, especially for children, older adults, and people with weakened immune systems. When do I need to see a health care provider for diarrhea? Although it is usually not harmful, diarrhea can become dangerous or signal a more serious problem. Contact your health care provider if you have: Signs of dehydration Diarrhea for more than 2 days, if you are an adult. For children, contact the provider if it lasts more than 24 hours. Severe pain in your abdomen or rectum (for adults) A fever of 102 degrees or higher Stools containing blood or pus Stools that are black and tarry If children have diarrhea, parents or caregivers should not hesitate to call a health care provider. Diarrhea can be especially dangerous in newborns and infants. How is the cause of diarrhea diagnosed? To find the cause of diarrhea, your health care provider may: Do a physical exam Ask about any medicines you are taking Test your stool or blood to look for bacteria, parasites, or other signs of disease or infection Ask you to stop eating certain foods to see whether your diarrhea goes away If you have chronic diarrhea, your health care provider may perform other tests to look for signs of disease. What are the treatments for diarrhea? Diarrhea is treated by replacing lost fluids and electrolytes to prevent dehydration. Depending on the cause of the problem, you may need medicines to stop the diarrhea or treat an infection. Adults with diarrhea should drink water, fruit juices, sports drinks, sodas without caffeine, and salty broths. As your symptoms improve, you can eat soft, bland food. Children with diarrhea should be given oral rehydration solutions to replace lost fluids and electrolytes. Can diarrhea be prevented? Two types of diarrhea can be prevented - rotavirus diarrhea and traveler's diarrhea. There are vaccines for rotavirus. They are given to babies in two or three doses. You can help prevent traveler's diarrhea by being careful about what you eat and drink when you are in developing countries: Use only bottled or purified water for drinking, making ice cubes, and brushing your teeth If you do use tap water, boil it or use iodine tablets Make sure that the cooked food you eat is fully cooked and served hot Avoid unwashed or unpeeled raw fruits and vegetables NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases





Amitriptyline and perphenazine is a combination drug. It is sometimes prescribed for people with depression, agitation, or anxiety. Amitriptyline and perphenazine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an overdose , call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Amitriptyline and perphenazine can be very harmful in large amounts.

Amitriptyline hydrochloride is a type of prescription medicine called a tricyclic antidepressant. It is used to treat depression. Amitriptyline hydrochloride overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an overdose , call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Amitriptyline can be harmful in large amounts.

Antidepressants are prescription medicines you may take to help with depression , anxiety , or pain. Like any medicine, there are reasons you may take antidepressants for a while and then consider no longer taking them.Stopping your medicine may be the right choice for you. But first, you should talk with your health care provider. The safe way to stop taking this medicine is to lower the dose over time. If you stop taking the medicine suddenly, you are at risk for: Returning symptoms, such as severe depression Increased risk of suicide (for some people) Withdrawal symptoms, which could feel like the flu or produce sleep problems, dizziness, headache, anxiety, or irritability

Desipramine hydrochloride is a type of medicine called a tricyclic antidepressant. It is taken to relieve symptoms of depression. Desipramine hydrochloride overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an overdose , call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Desipramine

Doxepin is a type of medicine called a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA). It is prescribed to treat depression and anxiety. Doxepin overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose. Toxic level of a TCA can build up in the body if the TCA and other medicines interact. This interaction can affect how well the body can break down the TCA. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose . If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Doxepin

Imipramine is a prescription medicine used to treat depression. Imipramine overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine. This can be by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose. If you or someone you are with has an overdose , call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Imipramine can be harmful in large amounts.

Serotonin syndrome (SS) is a potentially life-threatening drug reaction. It causes the body to have too much serotonin, a chemical produced by nerve cells.SS most often occurs when two medicines that affect the body's level of serotonin are taken together at the same time. The medicines cause too much serotonin to be released or to remain in the brain area. For example, you can develop this syndrome if you take migraine medicines called triptans together with antidepressants called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and selective serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SSNRIs). Common SSRIs include citalopram (Celexa), sertraline (Zoloft), fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and escitalopram (Lexapro). SSNRIs include duloxetine (Cymbalta), venlafaxine (Effexor), Desvenlafaxine (Pristiq), Milnacipran (Savella), and Levomilnacipran (Fetzima). Common triptans include sumatriptan (Imitrex), zolmitriptan (Zomig), frovatriptan (Frova), rizatriptan (Maxalt), almotriptan (Axert), naratriptan (Amerge), and eletriptan (Relpax). If you take these medicines, be sure to read the warning on the packaging. It tells you about the potential risk of serotonin syndrome. However, do not stop taking your medicine. Talk to your doctor about your concerns first. SS is more likely to occur on starting or increasing the medicine. Older antidepressants called monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) can also cause SS with the medicines described above, as well as meperidine (Demerol, a painkiller) or dextromethorphan (cough medicine). Drugs of abuse, such as ecstasy, LSD , cocaine , and amphetamines have also been associated with SS.

Trazodone is an antidepressant medicine. Sometimes, it is used as a sleep aid and to treat agitation in people with dementia. Trazodone overdose occurs when someone takes more than the normal or recommended amount of this medicine, either by accident or on purpose. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual overdose . If you or someone you are with overdoses, call your local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison control center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Trazodone









Agitation is an unpleasant state of extreme arousal. An agitated person may feel stirred up, excited, tense, confused, or irritable.Agitation can come on suddenly or over time. It can last for a few minutes, for weeks, or even months. Pain, stress, and fever can all increase agitation. Agitation by itself may not be a sign of a health problem. But if other symptoms occur, it can be a sign of disease. Agitation with a change in alertness (altered consciousness) can be a sign of delirium . Delirium has a medical cause and should be checked by a health care provider right away.

Fever is the temporary increase in the body's temperature in response to a disease or illness. A child has a fever when the temperature is at or above one of these levels: 100.4F (38C) measured in the bottom (rectally) 99.5F (37.5C) measured in the mouth (orally) 99F (37.2C) measured under the arm (axillary) An adult probably has a fever when the temperature is above 99F to 99.5F (37.2C to 37.5C), depending on the time of day.Normal body temperature may change during any given day. It is usually highest in the evening. Other factors that may affect body temperature are: A woman's menstrual cycle. In the second part of this cycle, her temperature may go up by 1 degree or more. Physical activity, strong emotion, eating, heavy clothing, medicines, high room temperature, and high humidity can all increase body temperature. Fever is an important part of the body's defense against infection. Most bacteria and viruses that cause infections in people thrive best at 98.6F (37C). Many infants and children develop high fevers with mild viral illnesses. Although a fever signals that a battle might be going on in the body, the fever is fighting for, not against the person. Brain damage from a fever generally will not occur unless the fever is over 107.6F (42C). Untreated fevers caused by infection will seldom go over 105F (40.6C) unless the child is overdressed or in a hot place. Febrile seizures do occur in some children. Most febrile seizures are over quickly and do not mean your child has epilepsy. These seizures also do not cause any permanent harm. Unexplained fevers that continue for days or weeks are called fevers of undetermined origin (FUO).

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental disorder in which a person is often worried or anxious about many things and finds it hard to control this anxiety.The cause of GAD is unknown. Genes may play a role. Stress may also contribute to the development of GAD. GAD is a common condition. Anyone can develop this disorder, even children . GAD occurs more often in women than in men.



Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental disorder in which a child is often worried or anxious about many things and finds it hard to control this anxiety.The cause of GAD is unknown. Genes may play a role. Children with family members who have an anxiety disorder also may be more likely to have one. Stress may be a factor in developing GAD. Things in a child's life that can cause stress and anxiety include: Loss, such as death of a loved one or parents' divorce Big life changes, such as moving to a new town A history of abuse Living with family with members who are fearful, anxious, or violent GAD is a common condition, affecting about 2% to 6% of children. GAD usually does not occur until puberty. It is more often seen in girls than in boys.



Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental condition in which you're frequently worried or anxious about many things. Your anxiety may seem out of control and get in the way of everyday activities. The right treatment can often improve GAD. You and your health care provider should make a treatment plan that could include talk therapy (psychotherapy), taking medicine, or both.Your provider may prescribe one or more medicines, including: An antidepressant, which can help with anxiety and depression. This kind of medicine may take weeks or months to start working. It is a safe medium- to long-term treatment for GAD. A benzodiazepine, which acts faster than an antidepressant to control anxiety. However, benzodiazepines can become less effective and habit forming over time. Your provider may prescribe a benzodiazepine to help your anxiety while you wait for the antidepressant to work. When taking medicine for GAD: Keep your provider informed about your symptoms. If a medicine isn't controlling symptoms, its dosage may need to be changed, or you may need to try a new medicine instead. Do not change the dosage or stop taking the medicine without talking to your provider. Take medicine at set times. For example, take it every day at breakfast. Check with your provider about the best time to take your medicine. Ask your provider about side effects and what to do if they occur.





It is normal for someone who is sick to feel uneasy, restless, afraid, or anxious. Certain thoughts, pain, or trouble breathing may trigger these feelings. Palliative care providers can help the person cope with these symptoms and feelings.Palliative care is a holistic approach to care that focuses on treating pain and symptoms and improving quality of life in people with serious illnesses and a limited life span.



Palliative care is treatment of the discomfort, symptoms, and stress of serious illness.  It provides relief from distressing symptoms including: Pain Shortness of breath Fatigue Constipation Nausea Loss of appetite Problems with sleep It can also help you deal with the side effects of the medical treatments you're receiving. Hospice care , care at the end of life, always includes palliative care.  But you may receive palliative care at any stage of an illness.  The goal is to make you comfortable and improve your quality of life. NIH: National Institute of Nursing Research

Separation anxiety in children is a developmental stage in which the child is anxious when separated from the primary caregiver (usually the mother).As infants grow, their emotions and reactions to the world around them seem to occur in a predictable order. Before 8 months, infants are so new to the world that they lack a sense of what is normal and safe and what may be dangerous. As a result, new settings or people seem to not frighten them. From 8 to 14 months, children often become frightened when they meet new people or visit new places. They recognize their parents as familiar and safe. When separated from their parents, they feel threatened and unsafe. Separation anxiety is a normal stage as a child grows and develops. It helped keep our ancestors alive and helps children learn how to master the world around them. It usually ends when the child is around 2 years old. At this age, toddlers begin to understand that parents may be out of sight now, but will return later. It's also normal for them to test their independence. To get over separation anxiety, children need to: Feel safe in their home. Trust people other than their parents. Trust that their parents will return. Even after children have mastered this stage, separation anxiety may return in times of stress. Most children will feel some degree of separation anxiety when in unfamiliar situations, most often when separated from their parents. When children are in situations (such as hospitals) and are under stress (such as illness or pain), they seek the safety, comfort, and protection of their parents. Since anxiety can worsen pain, staying with a child as much as possible can reduce the pain.











