An injury is damage to your body. It is a general term that refers to harm caused by accidents, falls , hits, weapons, and more. In the U.S., millions of people injure themselves every year. These injuries range from minor to life-threatening. Injuries can happen at work or play , indoors or outdoors, driving a car, or walking across the street. Wounds are injuries that break the skin or other body tissues.   They include cuts, scrapes, scratches, and punctured skin. They often happen because of an accident, but surgery, sutures, and stitches also cause wounds. Minor wounds usually aren't serious, but it is important to clean them. Serious and infected wounds may require first aid followed by a visit to your doctor. You should also seek attention if the wound is deep, you cannot close it yourself, you cannot stop the bleeding or get the dirt out, or it does not heal. Other common types of injuries include: Animal bites Bruises Burns Dislocations Electrical injuries Fractures (broken bones) Sprains and strains

Falls can be dangerous at any age. Babies and young children can get hurt falling off furniture or down the stairs. Older children may fall off playground equipment. For older adults, falls can be especially serious. They are at higher risk of falling. They are also more likely to fracture (break) a bone when they fall, especially if they have osteoporosis . A broken bone, especially when it is in a hip , may even lead to disability and a loss of independence for older adults. Some common causes of falls include: Balance problems Some medicines, which can make you feel dizzy, confused, or slow Vision problems Alcohol, which can affect your balance and reflexes Muscle weakness, especially in your legs, which can make it harder for you to get up from a chair or keep your balance when walking on an uneven surface. Certain illnesses, such as low blood pressure , diabetes , and neuropathy Slow reflexes, which make it hard to keep your balance or move out of the way of a hazard Tripping or slipping due to loss of footing or traction At any age, people can make changes to lower their risk of falling. It important to take care of your health, including getting regular eye exams . Regular exercise may lower your risk of falls by strengthening your muscles, improving your balance, and keeping your bones strong. And you can look for ways to make your house safer. For example, you can get rid of tripping hazards and make sure that you have rails on the stairs and in the bath. To reduce the chances of breaking a bone if you do fall, make sure that you get enough calcium and vitamin D . NIH: National Institute on Aging

Occupational health problems occur at work or because of the kind of work you do. These problems can include: Cuts, fractures (broken bones), and sprains and strains Loss of limbs Repetitive motion disorders Hearing problems caused by exposure to noise Vision problems Illness caused by breathing, touching, or swallowing unsafe substances Illness caused by exposure to radiation Exposure to germs in health care settings Good job safety and prevention practices can reduce your risk of these problems. Try to stay fit, reduce stress, set up your work area properly, and use the right equipment and gear.

Exercising is good for you, but sometimes you can injure yourself when you play sports or exercise. Accidents, poor training practices, or improper gear can cause them. Some people get hurt because they are not in shape. Not warming up or stretching enough can also lead to injuries. The most common sports injuries are: Sprains and strains Knee injuries Swollen muscles Achilles tendon injuries Pain along the shin bone Rotator cuff injuries Fractures (broken bones) Dislocations If you get hurt, stop playing. Continuing to play or exercise can cause more harm.  Treatment often begins with the RICE (Rest, Ice, Compression, and Elevation) method to relieve pain, reduce swelling, and speed healing. Other possible treatments include pain relievers, keeping the injured area from moving, rehabilitation, and sometimes surgery. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases

Accidents happen. Someone chokes on an ice cube or gets stung by a bee. It is important to know when to call 911 -- it is for life-threatening emergencies.  While waiting for help to arrive, you may be able to save someone's life. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) is for people whose hearts or breathing has stopped and the Heimlich maneuver is for people who are choking. You can also learn to handle common injuries and wounds . Cuts and scrapes, for example, should be rinsed with cool water. To stop bleeding, apply firm but gentle pressure, using gauze. If blood soaks through, add more gauze, keeping the first layer in place. Continue to apply pressure. It is important to have a first aid kit available.  Keep one at home and one in your car. It should include a first-aid guide.  Read the guide to learn how to use the items, so you are ready in case an emergency happens.

Wild animals usually avoid people. They might attack, however, if they feel threatened, are sick, or are protecting their young or territory. Attacks by pets are more common. Animal bites rarely are life-threatening, but if they become infected, you can develop serious medical problems. To prevent animal bites and complications from bites: Never pet, handle, or feed unknown animals Leave snakes alone Watch your children closely around animals Vaccinate your cats, ferrets, and dogs against rabies Spay or neuter your dog to make it less aggressive Get a tetanus booster if you have not had one recently Wear boots and long pants when you are in areas with venomous snakes If an animal bites you, clean the wound with soap and water as soon as possible. Get medical attention if necessary. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

A bruise is a mark on your skin caused by blood trapped under the surface. It happens when an injury crushes small blood vessels but does not break the skin. Those vessels break open and leak blood under the skin. Bruises are often painful and swollen. You can get skin, muscle and bone bruises. Bone bruises are the most serious. It can take months for a bruise to fade, but most last about two weeks. They start off a reddish color, and then turn bluish-purple and greenish-yellow before returning to normal. To reduce bruising, ice the injured area and elevate it above your heart. See your health care provider if you seem to bruise for no reason, or if the bruise appears to be infected.

A burn is damage to your body's tissues caused by heat, chemicals, electricity , sunlight , or radiation . Scalds from hot liquids and steam, building fires and flammable liquids and gases are the most common causes of burns. Another kind is an inhalation injury , caused by breathing smoke. There are three types of burns: First-degree burns damage only the outer layer of skin Second-degree burns damage the outer layer and the layer underneath Third-degree burns damage or destroy the deepest layer of skin and tissues underneath Burns can cause swelling, blistering, scarring and, in serious cases, shock , and even death. They also can lead to infections because they damage your skin's protective barrier. Treatment for burns depends on the cause of the burn, how deep it is, and how much of the body it covers. Antibiotic creams can prevent or treat infections.  For more serious burns, treatment may be needed to clean the wound, replace the skin, and make sure the patient has enough fluids and nutrition. NIH: National Institute of General Medical Sciences

Dislocations are joint injuries that force the ends of your bones out of position. The cause is often a fall or a blow, sometimes from playing a contact sport . You can dislocate your ankles, knees, shoulders , hips, elbows and jaw. You can also dislocate your finger and toe joints. Dislocated joints often are swollen, very painful and visibly out of place. You may not be able to move it. A dislocated joint is an emergency.  If you have one, seek medical attention. Treatment depends on which joint you dislocate and the severity of the injury. It might include manipulations to reposition your bones, medicine, a splint or sling, and rehabilitation. When properly repositioned, a joint will usually function and move normally again in a few weeks. Once you dislocate a shoulder or kneecap, you are more likely to dislocate it again. Wearing protective gear during sports may help prevent dislocations.

When you come in direct contact with electricity, it can pass through your body and cause injuries. These electrical injuries can be external or internal. You may have one or both types. External injuries are skin burns . Internal injuries include damage to your organs, bones, muscles, and nerves. You could also have abnormal heart rhythms and sudden cardiac arrest (SCA). How bad your injuries are depends on how strong the electric current was, what type of current it was, how it moved through your body, and how long you were exposed. Other factors include how healthy you are, and how quickly you get treatment. Causes of electrical injuries include: Lightning strikes Faulty electrical appliances Work-related exposures Contact with household wiring or power lines Accidents in small children, when they bite or suck on electrical cords, or stick objects in outlets If you get an electrical injury, you should see a doctor. You may have internal damage and not realize it.

A fracture is a break, usually in a bone. If the broken bone punctures the skin, it is called an open or compound fracture. Fractures commonly happen because of car accidents, falls , or sports injuries .  Other causes are low bone density and osteoporosis , which cause weakening of the bones. Overuse can cause stress fractures, which are very small cracks in the bone. Symptoms of a fracture are: Intense pain Deformity - the limb looks out of place Swelling, bruising, or tenderness around the injury Numbness and tingling Problems moving a limb You need to get medical care right away for any fracture. An x-ray can tell if your bone is broken. You may need to wear a cast or splint. Sometimes you need surgery to put in plates, pins or screws to keep the bone in place.

A sprain is a stretched or torn ligament. Ligaments are tissues that connect bones at a joint. Falling, twisting, or getting hit can all cause a sprain. Ankle and wrist sprains are common. Symptoms include pain, swelling, bruising, and being unable to move your joint. You might feel a pop or tear when the injury happens. A strain is a stretched or torn muscle or tendon. Tendons are tissues that connect muscle to bone. Twisting or pulling these tissues can cause a strain. Strains can happen suddenly or develop over time. Back and hamstring muscle strains are common. Many people get strains playing sports. Symptoms include pain, muscle spasms, swelling, and trouble moving the muscle. At first, treatment of both sprains and strains usually involves resting the injured area, icing it, wearing a bandage or device that compresses the area, and medicines. Later treatment might include exercise and physical therapy. NIH: National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases



Bleeding is the loss of blood. Bleeding may be: Inside the body (internally) Outside the body (externally) Bleeding may occur: Inside the body when blood leaks from blood vessels or organs Outside the body when blood flows through a natural opening (such as the ear, nose, mouth, vagina, or rectum) Outside the body when blood moves through a break in the skinGet emergency medical help for severe bleeding. This is very important if you think there is internal bleeding. Internal bleeding can very quickly become life threatening. Immediate medical care is needed. Serious injuries may cause heavy bleeding. Sometimes, minor injuries can bleed a lot. An example is a scalp wound. You may bleed a lot if you take blood-thinning medicine or have a bleeding disorder such as hemophilia . Bleeding in such people requires medical attention right away. The most important step for external bleeding is to apply direct pressure. This will likely stop most external bleeding. Always wash your hands before (if possible) and after giving first aid to someone who is bleeding. This helps prevent infection. Try to use latex gloves when treating someone who is bleeding. Latex gloves should be in every first aid kit. People allergic to latex can use nonlatex gloves. You can catch infections, such as viral hepatitis or HIV/AIDS, if you touch infected blood and it gets into an open wound, even a small one. Although puncture wounds usually don't bleed very much, they carry a high risk of infection. Seek medical care to prevent tetanus or other infection. Abdominal, pelvic, groin, neck, and chest wounds can be very serious because of the possibility of severe internal bleeding. They may not look very serious, but can result in shock and death. Seek medical care right away for any abdominal, pelvic, groin, neck, or chest wound. If organs are showing through the wound, do not try to push them back into place. Cover the injury with a moist cloth or bandage. Apply gentle pressure to stop the bleeding in these areas. Blood loss can cause blood to collect under the skin, turning it black and blue (bruised). Apply a cool compress to the area as soon as possible to reduce swelling . Do not place ice directly on the skin. Wrap the ice in a towel first.

A closed suction drain is placed under your skin during surgery. This drain removes any blood or other fluids that might build up in this area.A closed suction drain is used to remove fluids that build up in areas of your body after surgery or when you have an infection. Although there is more than one brand of closed suction drains, this drain is often called a Jackson-Pratt, or JP, drain. The drain is made up of two parts: A thin rubber tube A soft, round squeeze bulb that looks like a grenade One end of the rubber tube is placed in the area of your body where fluid may build up. The other end comes out through a small incision (cut). A squeeze bulb is attached to this outer end. Ask your health care provider when you may take a shower while you have this drain. You may be asked to take a sponge bath until the drain is removed. There are many ways to wear the drain depending on where the drain comes out of your body. The squeeze bulb has a plastic loop that can be used to pin the bulb to your clothes. If the drain is in your upper body, you can tie a cloth tape around your neck like a necklace and hang the bulb from the tape. There are special garments, such as camisoles, belts, or shorts that have pockets or Velcro loops for the bulbs and openings for the tubes. Ask your provider what might be best for you. Health insurance may cover the cost of these garments, if you get a prescription from your provider.

A crush injury occurs when force or pressure is put on a body part. This type of injury most often happens when part of the body is squeezed between two heavy objects. Damage related to crush injuries include: Bleeding Bruising Compartment syndrome (increased pressure in an arm or leg that causes serious muscle, nerve, blood vessel, and tissue damage) Fracture (broken bone) Laceration (open wound) Nerve injury Infection (caused by bacteria that enter the body through the wound)Steps for first aid treatment of a crush injury are: Stop bleeding by applying direct pressure. Cover the area with a wet cloth or bandage. Then, raise the area above the level of the heart, if possible. If there is suspicion of a head, neck, or spinal injury, immobilize those areas if possible and then limit movement to only the crushed area. Call your local emergency number (such as 911) or local hospital for further advice. Crush injuries most often need to be evaluated in a hospital emergency department. Surgery may be needed.

A cut is a break or opening in the skin. It is also called a laceration. A cut may be deep, smooth, or jagged. It may be near the surface of the skin, or deeper. A deep cut can affect tendons, muscles, ligaments, nerves, blood vessels, or bone. A puncture is a wound made by a pointed object such as a nail, knife, or sharp tooth. Puncture wounds often appear to be on the surface, but may extend into the deeper tissue layers.Symptoms include: Bleeding Problems with function (movement) or feeling (numbness, tingling) below the wound site Pain Infection may occur with some cuts and puncture wounds. The following are more likely to become infected: Bites Punctures Crush injuries Dirty wounds Wounds on the feet Wounds that are not promptly treated



An electrical injury is damage to the skin or internal organs when a person comes into direct contact with an electrical current.The human body conducts electricity very well. That means electricity passes very easily throughout the body. Direct contact with electrical current can be deadly. While some electrical burns look minor, there still may be serious internal damage, especially to the heart, muscles, or brain. Electric current can cause injury in four ways: Cardiac arrest due to the electrical effect on the heart Muscle, nerve, and tissue destruction from a current passing through the body Thermal burns from contact with the electrical source Falling or injury after contact with electricity

A genital injury is an injury to male or female sex organs, mainly those outside the body. It also refers to injury in the area between the legs, called the perineum.Injury to the genitals can be very painful. It may cause a lot of bleeding. Such injury can affect the reproductive organs and the bladder and urethra. Damage may be temporary or permanent.

A gunshot wound is caused when a bullet or other projectile is shot into or through the body. Gunshot wounds can cause serious injury, including: Severe bleeding Damage to tissues and organs Broken bones Wound infections Paralysis The amount of damage depends on the location of the injury and the speed and type of bullet. Gunshot wounds to the head or body (torso) are likely to cause more damage. High-velocity wounds with fracture are associated with an increased risk of infection.If the wound was severe, you may have had surgery to: Stop bleeding Clean the wound Find and remove bullet pieces Find and remove pieces of broken or shattered bone Place drains or tubes for body fluids Remove portions of, or whole, organs Gunshot wounds that pass through the body without hitting major organs, blood vessels, or bone tend to cause less damage. You may have bullet pieces that remain in your body. Often these cannot be removed without causing more damage. Scar tissue will form around these remaining pieces, which may cause ongoing pain or other discomfort. You may have an open wound or a closed wound , depending on your injury. Your health care provider will tell you how to change your dressing and care for your wound. Keep these tips in mind: Keep the dressing and area around it clean and dry. Take any antibiotics or pain relievers as directed. Gunshot wounds can get infected because material and debris can get pulled into the wound with the bullet. Try to elevate the wound so it is above your heart. This helps reduce swelling. You may need to do this while sitting or lying down. You can use pillows to prop up the area. If your provider says it is OK, you may use an ice pack on the bandage to help with swelling. Ask how often you should apply the ice. Be sure to keep the bandage dry. Your provider may change your dressing for you at first. Once you get the OK to change the dressing yourself: Follow instructions on how to clean and dry the wound. Be sure to wash your hands after removing an old dressing and before cleaning the wound. Wash your hands again after cleaning the wound and applying the new dressing. Do not use skin cleansers, alcohol, peroxide, iodine, or soaps with antibacterial chemicals on the wound unless your provider tells you to. These can damage the wound tissue and slow your healing. Do not put any lotion, cream, or herbal remedies on or around your wound without asking your provider first. If you have non-dissolvable stitches or staples, your provider will remove them within 3 to 21 days. Do not pull at your stitches or try to remove them on your own.

A Hemovac drain is placed under your skin during surgery. This drain removes any blood or other fluids that might build up in this area. You can go home with the drain still in place.Your nurse will tell you how often you need to empty the drain. You will also be shown how to empty and take care of your drain. The following instructions will help you at home. If you have questions, ask your health care provider.

A wound is a break or opening in the skin. Your skin protects your body from germs. When the skin is broken, even during surgery, germs can enter and cause infection. Wounds often occur because of an accident or injury. Types of wounds include: Cuts Scrapes Puncture wounds Burns Pressure sores A wound may be smooth or jagged. It may be near the surface of the skin or deeper. Deep wounds can affect: Tendons Muscles Ligaments Nerves Blood vessels Bones Minor wounds often heal easily, but all wounds need care to prevent infection.Wounds heal in stages. The smaller the wound, the quicker it will heal. The larger or deeper the wound, the longer it takes to heal. When you get a cut, scrape, or puncture, the wound will bleed. The blood will start to clot within a few minutes or less and stop the bleeding. The blood clots dry and form a scab, which protects the tissue underneath from germs. Not all wounds bleed. For example, burns, some puncture wounds, and pressure sores do not bleed. Once the scab forms, your body's immune system starts to protect the wound from infection. The wound becomes slightly swollen, red or pink, and tender. You also may see some clear fluid oozing from the wound. This fluid helps clean the area. Blood vessels open in the area, so blood can bring oxygen and nutrients to the wound. Oxygen is essential for healing. White blood cells help fight infection from germs and begin to repair the wound. This stage takes about 2 to 5 days. Tissue growth and rebuilding occur next. Over the next 3 weeks or so, the body repairs broken blood vessels and new tissue grows. Red blood cells help create collagen, which are tough, white fibers that form the foundation for new tissue. The wound starts to fill in with new tissue, called granulation tissue. New skin begins to form over this tissue. As the wound heals, the edges pull inward and the wound gets smaller. A scar forms and the wound becomes stronger. As healing continues, you may notice that the area itches. After the scab falls off, the area may look stretched, red, and shiny. The scar that forms will be smaller than the original wound. It will be less strong and less flexible than the surrounding skin. Over time, the scar will fade and may disappear completely. This can take as long as 2 years. Some scars never go away completely. Scars form because the new tissue grows back differently than the original tissue. If you only injured the top layer of skin, you will probably not have a scar. With deeper wounds, you are more likely to have a scar. Some people are more likely to scar than others. Some may have thick, unsightly scars called keloids . People with darker complexions are more likely to have keloids form.

A human bite can break, puncture, or tear the skin. Bites that break the skin can be very serious because of the risk for infection.Human bites can occur in two ways: If someone bites you If your hand comes into contact with a person's teeth and breaks the skin, such as during a fist fight Bites are very common among young children. Children often bite to express anger or other negative feelings. Males between 10 and 34 years old are more likely to be victims of human bites. Human bites may be more dangerous than animal bites. Certain germs in some human mouths can cause hard-to-treat infections. You can also get certain diseases from a human bite, such as HIV/AIDS or hepatitis B or hepatitis C .

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy uses a special pressure chamber to increase the amount of oxygen in the blood.Some hospitals have a hyperbaric chamber. Smaller units may be available in outpatient centers. The air pressure inside a hyperbaric oxygen chamber is about two and a half times higher than the normal pressure in the atmosphere. This helps your blood carry more oxygen to organs and tissues in your body. The other benefits of increased pressure of oxygen in the tissues may include: More and improved oxygen supply Reduction in swelling and edema Stopping infection Hyperbaric therapy can help wounds, particularly infected wounds, heal more quickly. The therapy may be used to treat: Air or gas embolism Bone infections ( osteomyelitis ) that have not improved with other treatments Burns Crush injuries Frost bites Carbon monoxide poisoning Certain types of brain or sinus infections Decompression sickness (for example, a diving injury) Gas gangrene Necrotizing soft tissue infections Radiation injury (for example, damage from radiation therapy for cancer) Skin grafts Wounds that have not healed with other treatments (for example, it may be used to treat a foot ulcer in someone with diabetes or very bad circulation) This treatment may also be used to provide enough oxygen to the lung during a procedure called whole lung lavage, which is used to clean an entire lung in people with certain medical conditions, like pulmonary alveolar proteinosis. Treatment for long-term (chronic) conditions may be repeated over days or weeks. A treatment session for more acute conditions such as decompression sickness may last longer, but may not need to be repeated. You might feel pressure in your ears while you are in the hyperbaric chamber. Your ears may pop when you get out of the chamber.

A laceration is a cut that goes all the way through the skin. A small cut can be cared for at home. A large cut needs medical attention right away. If the cut is large, it may need stitches or staples to close the wound and stop the bleeding. It is important to take care of the injury site after the doctor or health care provider applies the stitches. This helps prevent infection and allows the wound to heal properly.Stitches are special threads that are sewn through the skin at an injury site to bring a wound together. Care for your stitches and wound as follows: Keep the area clean and dry for the first 24 to 48 hours after stitches have been placed. Then, you can start to gently wash around the site 1 to 2 times daily. Wash with cool water and soap. Clean as close to the stitches as you can. Do not wash or rub the stitches directly. Dab the site dry with a clean paper towel. Do not rub the area. Avoid using the towel directly on the stitches. If there was a bandage over the stitches, replace it with a new clean bandage and antibiotic treatment, if instructed to do so. Your provider should also tell you when you need to have a wound checked and the stitches removed. If not, contact your provider for an appointment.

A laceration is a cut that goes all the way through the skin. A small cut can be cared for at home. A large cut requires immediate medical attention. If the cut is minor, a liquid bandage (liquid adhesive) can be used on the cut to close the wound and help stop bleeding. Using a liquid bandage is quick to apply. It causes only slight burning when applied. Liquid bandages seal the cut closed after only 1 application. There is less chance for infection since the wound is sealed shut. These products are waterproof, so you can shower or bathe without worry. The seal lasts for 5 to 10 days. It will fall off naturally after it has done its job. In some cases after the seal falls off, you can reapply more liquid bandage, but only after seeking medical advice from your health care provider. But most minor cuts will be mostly healed at this point. Using these products may also reduce the size of scars that form at the injury site. Liquid adhesives can be found at your local pharmacy.With clean hands or a clean towel, wash the cut and surrounding area thoroughly with cold water and soap. Dry with a clean towel. Make sure the site is completely dry. The liquid bandage should not be placed inside the wound; it should be placed on top of the skin, where the cut comes together. Create a seal by gently bringing the cut together with your fingers. Apply the liquid bandage over the top of the cut. Spread it from one end of the cut to the other, covering the cut completely. Hold the cut together for about a minute to give the adhesive enough time to dry. Do not use liquid bandage around the eyes, in the ear or nose, or internally in the mouth. If the liquid is accidentally applied to any of these areas call your doctor or provider or local emergency number (such as 911). It is OK to bathe after the liquid adhesive has dried. Try not to scrub the site. Doing so may loosen the seal or even remove the adhesive completely. It is also OK to wash the site with soap and water daily to keep the area clean and prevent infection. Pat the site dry after washing. Do not use any other ointments on the site of the cut. This will weaken the bond and slow the healing process. Do not scratch or scrub the site. This will remove the liquid bandage. Keep the following in mind: Prevent the wound from reopening by keeping activity to a minimum. Make sure your hands are clean when you care for the wound. Take proper care of your wound to help reduce scarring. Call your provider if you have questions or concerns about how to care for stitches or staples at home. You can take pain medicine, such as acetaminophen, as directed for pain at the wound site. Follow-up with your provider to make sure the wound is healing properly.

A skin graft is a piece of healthy skin removed from one area of your body to repair damaged or missing skin somewhere else on your body. This skin does not have its own source of blood flow. Learning how to care for skin flaps and grafts can help them heal more quickly and reduce scarring.A skin flap is healthy skin and tissue that is partly detached and moved to cover a nearby wound. A skin flap may contain skin and fat, or skin, fat, and muscle. Often, a skin flap is still attached to its original site at one end and remains connected to a blood vessel. Sometimes a flap is moved to a new site and the blood vessel is surgically reconnected. This is called a free flap. Skin grafts are used to help more serious, larger and deeper wounds heal, including: Wounds that are too big to heal on their own Burns Skin loss from a serious skin infection Surgery for skin cancer Venous ulcers , pressure ulcers , or diabetic ulcers that do not heal After mastectomy or amputation The area from where skin is taken is called the donor site. After surgery, you will have two wounds, the graft or flap itself and the donor site. Donor sites for grafts and flaps are chosen based on: How closely the skin matches the area of the wound How visible the scar will be from the donor site How close the donor site is to the wound Often the donor site may be more painful after surgery than the wound due to newly exposed nerve endings.

Sterile means free from germs. When you care for your catheter or surgery wound, you need to take steps to avoid spreading germs. Some cleaning and care procedures need to be done in a sterile way so that you do not get an infection. Follow your health care provider's instructions on using sterile technique. Use the information below as a reminder of the steps.Carefully follow all of the steps below to keep your work area sterile. You will need: Running water and soap A sterile kit or pad Gloves (sometimes these are in your kit) A clean, dry surface Clean paper towels Wash your hands well and keep all work surfaces clean and dry at all times. When you handle supplies, touch only the outside wrappers with your bare hands. You may need to wear a mask over your nose and mouth. Keep your supplies within your reach so you do not drop or rub against them while you go through the steps. If you need to cough or sneeze, turn your head away from your supplies and cover your mouth firmly with the crook of your elbow.

When you have open heart surgery , the surgeon makes a cut (incision) that runs down the middle of your chest bone (sternum). The incision usually heals on its own. But sometimes, there are complications that require treatment. Two wound complications that can happen within 30 days of open heart surgery are: Infection in the wound or chest bone. The symptoms can be pus at the incision, a fever, or feeling tired and sick. The sternum separates into two. The sternum and chest become unstable. You might hear a clicking sound in the sternum when breathing, coughing, or moving around.To treat the complication, the surgeon reopens the area that was operated on. The procedure is done in the operating room. The surgeon: Removes the wires holding the sternum together. Does tests of the skin and tissue in the wound to look for signs of infection. Removes dead or infected tissue in the wound (debride the wound). Rinses the wound with salt water (saline). After the wound is cleaned out, the surgeon may or may not close the wound. The wound is packed with a dressing. The dressing will be changed often. Or your surgeon may use a VAC (vacuum-assisted closure) dressing. It is a negative pressure dressing. It increases blood flow around the sternum and improves healing. The parts of VAC dressing are: Vacuum pump Foam piece cut to fit the wound Vacuum tube Clear dressing that is taped on top The foam piece is changed every 2 to 3 days. Your surgeon may put a chest harness on you. This will make the chest bones more stable. It may take days, weeks, or even months for the wound to be clean, clear of infection, and finally heal. Once this occurs, the surgeon may use a muscle flap to cover and close the wound. The flap can be taken from your buttocks, shoulder, or upper chest.

An incision is a cut through the skin that is made during surgery. It is also called a surgical wound. Some incisions are small, others are long. The size of the incision depends on the kind of surgery you had. Sometimes, an incision breaks open. This may happen along the entire cut or just part of it. Your doctor may decide not to close it again with sutures (stitches).If your doctor does not close your wound again with sutures, you need to care for it at home, since it may take time to heal. The wound will heal from the bottom to the top. A dressing helps absorb drainage and keep the skin from closing before the wound underneath fills in.

An incision is a cut through the skin made during surgery. It is also called a "surgical wound." Some incisions are small. Others are very long. The size of an incision depends on the kind of surgery you had. To close your incision, your doctor used one of the following: Stitches (sutures) Clips Staples Skin glue Proper wound care can help prevent infection and reduce scarring as your surgical wound heals.When you come home after surgery, you may have a dressing on your wound. Dressings do several things, including: Protect your wound from germs Reduce the risk of infection Cover your wound so that stitches or staples do not catch on clothing Protect the area as it heals Soak up any fluids that leak from your wound You can leave your original dressing in place for as long as your health care provider says. You will want to change it sooner if it becomes wet or soaked with blood or other fluids. Do not wear tight clothing that rubs against the incision while it is healing. Your provider will tell you how often to change your dressing. Your provider likely gave you specific instructions on how to change the dressing. The steps outlined below will help you remember. Getting prepared: Clean your hands before touching the dressing. Wash your hands with soap and warm water. Also clean under your nails. Rinse, then dry your hands with a clean towel. Make sure you have all the supplies handy. Have a clean work surface. Remove the old dressing. Put on clean medical gloves if your wound is infected (red or oozing), or if you are changing the dressing for someone else. The gloves do not need to be sterile. Carefully loosen the tape from the skin. If the dressing sticks to the wound, moisten it gently with water and try again, unless your doctor instructed you to pull it off dry. Put the old dressing in a plastic bag and set it aside. Remove the gloves if you had them on. Throw them in the same plastic bag as the old dressing. Wash your hands again. When you put on a new dressing: Make sure your hands are clean. Put on clean gloves if your own wound is infected, or if you are putting on dressing for someone else. Do not touch the inside of the dressing. Do not apply antibiotic cream unless your doctor tells you to. Place the dressing over the wound and tape down all 4 sides. Put the old dressing, tape, and other trash in the plastic bag. Seal the bag and throw it away. If you have non-dissolvable stitches or staples, the provider will remove them. Do not pull at your stitches or try to remove them on your own.

Surgery that involves a cut (incision) in the skin can lead to a wound infection after surgery. Most surgical wound infections show up within the first 30 days after surgery. Surgical wound infections may have pus draining from them and can be red, painful or hot to touch. You might have a fever and feel sick.Surgical wounds can become infected by: Germs that are already on your skin that spread to the surgical wound Germs that are inside your body or from the organ on which the surgery was performed Germs that are in the environment around you such as infected surgical instruments or on the hands of the health care provider. You are more at risk for a surgical wound infection if you: Have poorly controlled diabetes Have problems with your immune system Are overweight or obese Are a smoker Take corticosteroids (for example, prednisone) Have surgery that lasts longer than 2 hours There are different levels of wound infections: Superficial -- the infection is in the skin area only Deep -- the infection goes deeper than the skin into the muscle and tissue Organ/space -- the infection is deep and involves the organ and space where you had surgery

Your health care provider has covered your wound with a wet-to-dry dressing. With this type of dressing, a wet (or moist) gauze dressing is put on your wound and allowed to dry. Wound drainage and dead tissue can be removed when you take off the old dressing. Follow any instructions you are given on how to change the dressing. Use this sheet as a reminder.Your provider will tell you how often you should change your dressing at home. As the wound heals, you should not need as much gauze or packing gauze.

A wound care center, or clinic, is a medical facility for treating wounds that do not heal. You may have a non-healing wound if it: Has not started to heal in 2 weeks Has not completely healed in 6 weeksCommon types of non-healing wounds include: Pressure sores Surgical wounds Radiation sores Foot ulcers due to diabetes , poor blood flow, chronic bone infection (osteomyelitis), or swollen legs Certain wounds may not heal well due to: Diabetes Poor circulation Nerve damage Bone infection Being inactive or immobile Weak immune system Poor nutrition Excess alcohol use Smoking Non-healing wounds may take months to heal. Some wounds never heal completely.



As parents, we want to keep our children safe from harm. Take steps to keep your children safe: Install the right child safety seat in your car Teach children how to cross the street safely Make sure they wear the right gear and equipment for sports Install and test smoke alarms Store medicines, cleaners and other dangerous substances in locked cabinets Babyproof your home Don't leave small children unattended







If you've ever gotten a splinter or had sand in your eye, you've had experience with a foreign body. A foreign body is something that is stuck inside you but isn't supposed to be there. You may inhale or swallow a foreign body, or you may get one from an injury to almost any part of your body.  Foreign bodies are more common in small children, who sometimes stick things in their mouths, ears, and noses. Some foreign bodies, like a small splinter, do not cause serious harm. Inhaled or swallowed foreign bodies may cause choking or bowel obstruction and may require medical care.

You can't remove all the safety hazards from your life, but you can reduce them. To avoid many major hazards and prepare for emergencies: Keep emergency phone numbers by your telephones Make a first aid kit for your home Make a family emergency plan Install and maintain smoke alarms and carbon monoxide detectors Keep guns unloaded and locked up. Lock up the ammunition separately. Follow the directions carefully when using tools or equipment Young children are especially at risk.  Supervision is the best way to keep them safe. Childproofing the house can also help.

A scar is a permanent patch of skin that grows over a wound . It forms when your body heals itself after a cut, scrape, burn, or sore. You can also get scars from surgery that cuts through the skin, infections like chickenpox, or skin conditions like acne . Scars are often thicker, as well as pinker, redder, or shinier, than the rest of your skin. How your scar looks depends on: How big and deep your wound is Where it is How long it takes to heal Your age Your inherited tendency to scar Scars usually fade over time but never go away completely. If the way a scar looks bothers you, various treatments might minimize it. These include surgical revision, dermabrasion, laser treatments, injections, chemical peels, and creams.

There are many reasons to have surgery. Some operations can relieve or prevent pain. Others can reduce a symptom of a problem or improve some body function. Some surgeries are done to find a problem. For example, a surgeon may do a biopsy , which involves removing a piece of tissue to examine under a microscope. Some surgeries, like heart surgery , can save your life. Some operations that once needed large incisions (cuts in the body) can now be done using much smaller cuts. This is called laparoscopic surgery. Surgeons insert a thin tube with a camera to see, and use small tools to do the surgery. After surgery there can be a risk of complications, including infection, too much bleeding, reaction to anesthesia , or accidental injury. There is almost always some pain with surgery. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality





