If you are like many Americans, you drink alcohol at least occasionally. For many people, moderate drinking is probably safe. But drinking less is better for your health than drinking more. And there are some people who should not drink at all. Because drinking too much can be harmful, it's important to know how alcohol affects you and how much is too much. How does alcohol affect the body? Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant. This means that it is a drug that slows down brain activity. It can change your mood, behavior, and self-control. It can cause problems with memory and thinking clearly. Alcohol can also affect your coordination and physical control. Alcohol also has effects on the other organs in your body. For example, it can raise your blood pressure and heart rate. If you drink too much at once, it could make you throw up. Why are the effects of alcohol different from person to person? Alcohol's effects vary from person to person, depending on a variety of factors, including: How much you drank How quickly you drank it The amount of food you ate before drinking Your age Your sex Your race or ethnicity Your physical condition Whether or not you have a family history of alcohol problems What is moderate drinking? For most women, moderate drinking is no more than one standard drink a day For most men, moderate drinking is no more than two standard drinks a day Even though moderate drinking may be safe for many people, there are still risks. Moderate drinking can raise the risk of death from certain cancers and heart diseases. What is a standard drink? In the United States, a standard drink is one that contains about 14 grams of pure alcohol, which is found in: 12 ounces of beer (5% alcohol content) 5 ounces of wine (12% alcohol content) 1.5 ounces or a "shot" of distilled spirits or liquor (40% alcohol content) Who should not drink alcohol? Some people should not drink alcohol at all, including those who: Are recovering from an alcohol use disorder (AUD) or are unable to control the amount they drink Are under age 21 Are pregnant or trying to become pregnant Are taking medicines that can interact with alcohol Have medical conditions that get can worse if you drink alcohol Are planning on driving Will be operating machinery If you have questions about whether it is safe for you to drink, talk with your health care provider. What is excessive drinking? Excessive drinking includes binge drinking and heavy alcohol use: Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more. For a man, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For a woman, it is after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Heavy alcohol use is having having more than 4 drinks on any day for men or more than 3 drinks for women Binge drinking raises your risk of injuries, car crashes, and alcohol poisoning. It also puts you of becoming violent or being the victim of violence. Heavy alcohol use over a long period of time may cause health problems such as: Alcohol use disorder Liver diseases , including cirrhosis and fatty liver disease Heart diseases Increased risk for certain cancers Increased risk of injuries Heavy alcohol use can also cause problems at home, at work, and with friends. But treatment can help. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

What is alcohol use disorder (AUD)? For most adults, moderate alcohol use is probably not harmful. However, about 18 million adult Americans have an alcohol use disorder (AUD).  This means that their drinking causes distress and harm. AUD can range from mild to severe, depending on the symptoms. Severe AUD is sometimes called alcoholism or alcohol dependence. AUD is a disease that causes: Craving - a strong need to drink Loss of control - not being able to stop drinking once you've started Negative emotional state - feeling anxious and irritable when you are not drinking What is binge drinking? Binge drinking is drinking so much at once that your blood alcohol concentration (BAC) level is 0.08% or more. For a man, this usually happens after having 5 or more drinks within a few hours. For a woman, it is after about 4 or more drinks within a few hours. Not everyone who binge drinks has an AUD, but they are at higher risk for getting one. What are the dangers of too much alcohol? Too much alcohol is dangerous. Heavy drinking can increase the risk of certain cancers. It may lead to liver diseases , such as fatty liver disease and cirrhosis . It can also cause damage to the brain and other organs. Drinking during pregnancy can harm your baby . Alcohol also increases the risk of death from car crashes, injuries, homicide, and suicide. How do I know if I have an alcohol use disorder (AUD)? You may have an AUD if you can answer yes to two or more of these questions: In the past year, have you: Ended up drinking more or for a longer time than you had planned to? Wanted to cut down or stop drinking, or tried to, but couldn't? Spent a lot of your time drinking or recovering from drinking? Felt a strong need to drink? Found that drinking - or being sick from drinking - often interfered with your family life, job, or school? Kept drinking even though it was causing trouble with your family or friends? Given up or cut back on activities that you enjoyed just so you could drink? Gotten into dangerous situations while drinking or after drinking? Some examples are driving drunk and having unsafe sex. Kept drinking even though it was making you feel depressed or anxious? Or when it was adding to another health problem? Had to drink more and more to feel the effects of the alcohol? Had withdrawal symptoms when the alcohol was wearing off? They include trouble sleeping, shakiness, irritability, anxiety , depression , restlessness, nausea , and sweating . In severe cases, you could have a fever , seizures , or hallucinations. If you have any of these symptoms, your drinking may already be a cause for concern. The more symptoms you have, the more serious the problem is. What should I do if I think that I might have an alcohol use disorder (AUD)? If you think you might have an AUD, see your health care provider for an evaluation. Your provider can help make a treatment plan , prescribe medicines, and if needed, give you treatment referrals. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

Alcohol is the most widely misused substance among America's youth. Drinking by young people has big health and safety risks. It is dangerous because it: Causes many deaths and injuries Can lead to poor decisions about engaging in risky behavior, such as drinking and driving or unprotected sex Increases the risk of physical and sexual assault Can lead to other problems, such as trouble in school May interfere with brain development Increases the risk of alcohol problems later in life Kids often begin drinking to look "cool" or fit in with their peers. Parents can help their kids avoid alcohol problems.  Open communication and conversations about drinking are important. So is being involved in your child's life. Get help for your child if you suspect a drinking problem. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism

When you are pregnant , you are not just "eating for two." You also breathe and drink for two. If you smoke, use alcohol or take illegal drugs, so does your unborn baby. To protect your baby, you should avoid: Tobacco. Smoking during pregnancy passes nicotine, carbon monoxide, and other harmful chemicals to your baby. This could cause many problems for your unborn baby's development. It raises the risk of your baby being born too small , too early , or with birth defects . Smoking can also affect babies after they are born. Your baby would be more likely to develop diseases such as asthma and obesity. There is also a higher risk of dying from sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS). Drinking alcohol. There is no known amount of alcohol that is safe for a woman to drink during pregnancy. If you drink alcohol when you are pregnant, your child could be born with lifelong fetal alcohol syndrome disorders (FASD). Children with FASD can have a mix of physical, behavioral, and learning problems. Illegal drugs. Using illegal drugs such as cocaine and methamphetamines may cause underweight babies, birth defects, or withdrawal symptoms after birth. Misusing prescription drugs. If you are taking prescription medicines, carefully follow your health care provider's instructions. It can be dangerous to take more medicines than you are supposed to, use them to get high, or take someone else's medicines. For example, misusing opioids can cause birth defects, withdrawal in the baby, or even loss of the baby. If you are pregnant and you are doing any of these things, get help. Your health care provider can recommend programs to help you quit. You and your baby's health depend on it. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. There are many kinds of liver diseases: Diseases caused by  viruses, such as hepatitis A , hepatitis B , and hepatitis C Diseases caused by drugs, poisons, or too much alcohol. Examples include fatty liver disease and cirrhosis . Liver cancer Inherited diseases, such as hemochromatosis and Wilson disease Symptoms of liver disease can vary, but they often include swelling of the abdomen and legs, bruising easily, changes in the color of your stool and urine, and jaundice , or yellowing of the skin and eyes. Sometimes there are no symptoms. Tests such as imaging tests and liver function tests can check for liver damage and help to diagnose liver diseases.

Cirrhosis is scarring of the liver. Scar tissue forms because of injury or long-term disease. Scar tissue cannot do what healthy liver tissue does - make protein, help fight infections, clean the blood, help digest food and store energy.   Cirrhosis can lead to  : Easy bruising or bleeding, or nosebleeds Swelling of the abdomen or legs Extra sensitivity to medicines High blood pressure in the vein entering the liver Enlarged veins called varices in the esophagus and stomach. Varices can bleed suddenly. Kidney failure Jaundice Severe itching Gallstones A small number of people with cirrhosis get liver cancer . Your doctor will diagnose cirrhosis with blood tests, imaging tests, or a biopsy. Cirrhosis has many causes. In the United States, the most common causes are chronic alcoholism and hepatitis . Nothing will make the scar tissue disappear, but treating the cause can keep it from getting worse. If too much scar tissue forms, you may need to consider a liver transplant . NIH: National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases

What is fatty liver disease? Your liver is the largest organ inside your body. It helps your body digest food, store energy, and remove poisons. Fatty liver disease is a condition in which fat builds up in your liver. There are two main types: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) Alcoholic fatty liver disease, also called alcoholic steatohepatitis What is nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)? NAFLD is a type of fatty liver disease that is not related to heavy alcohol use. There are two kinds: Simple fatty liver, in which you have fat in your liver but little or no inflammation or liver cell damage. Simple fatty liver typically does not get bad enough to cause liver damage or complications. Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), in which you have inflammation and liver cell damage, as well as fat in your liver. Inflammation and liver cell damage can cause fibrosis, or scarring, of the liver. NASH may lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer . What is alcoholic fatty liver disease? Alcoholic fatty liver disease is due to heavy alcohol use. Your liver breaks down most of the alcohol you drink, so it can be removed from your body. But the process of breaking it down can generate harmful substances. These substances can damage liver cells, promote inflammation, and weaken your body's natural defenses. The more alcohol that you drink, the more you damage your liver.  Alcoholic fatty liver disease is the earliest stage of alcohol-related liver disease. The next stages are alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Who is at risk for fatty liver disease? The cause of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is unknown. Researchers do know that it is more common in people who: Have type 2 diabetes and prediabetes Have obesity Are middle aged or older (although children can also get it) Are Hispanic, followed by non-Hispanic whites. It is less common in African Americans. Have high levels of fats in the blood, such as cholesterol and triglycerides Have high blood pressure Take certain drugs, such as corticosteroids and some cancer drugs Have certain metabolic disorders , including metabolic syndrome Have rapid weight loss Have certain infections, such as hepatitis C Have been exposed to some toxins NAFLD affects about 25% of people in the world. As the rates of obesity, type 2 diabetes, and high cholesterol are rising in the United States, so is the rate of NAFLD. NAFLD is the most common chronic liver disorder in the United States. Alcoholic fatty liver disease only happens in people who are heavy drinkers, especially those who have been drinking for a long period of time. The risk is higher for heavy drinkers who are women, have obesity, or have certain genetic mutations. What are the symptoms of fatty liver disease? Both NAFLD and alcoholic fatty liver disease are usually silent diseases with few or no symptoms. If you do have symptoms, you may feel tired or have discomfort in the upper right side of your abdomen. How is fatty liver disease diagnosed? Because there are often no symptoms, it is not easy to find fatty liver disease. Your doctor may suspect that you have it if you get abnormal results on liver tests that you had for other reasons. To make a diagnosis, your doctor will use: Your medical history A physical exam Various tests, including blood and imaging tests , and sometimes a biopsy As part of the medical history, your doctor will ask about your alcohol use, to find out whether fat in your liver is a sign of alcoholic fatty liver disease or nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFLD). He or she will also ask which medicines you take, to try to determine whether a medicine is causing your NAFLD. During the physical exam, your doctor will examine your body and check your weight and height. Your doctor will look for signs of fatty liver disease, such as: An enlarged liver Signs of cirrhosis, such as jaundice , a condition that causes your skin and whites of your eyes to turn yellow You will likely have blood tests, including liver function tests and blood count tests . In some cases you may also have imaging tests, like those that check for fat in the liver and the stiffness of your liver. Liver stiffness can mean fibrosis, which is scarring of the liver. In some cases you may also need a liver biopsy to confirm the diagnosis, and to check how bad the liver damage is. What are the treatments for fatty liver disease? Doctors recommend weight loss for nonalcoholic fatty liver. Weight loss can reduce fat in the liver, inflammation, and fibrosis. If your doctor thinks that a certain medicine is the cause of your NAFLD, you should stop taking that medicine.  But check with your doctor before stopping the medicine. You may need to get off the medicine gradually, and you might need to switch to another medicine instead. There are no medicines that have been approved to treat NAFLD. Studies are investigating whether a certain diabetes medicine or Vitamin E can help, but more studies are needed. The most important part of treating alcohol-related fatty liver disease is to stop drinking alcohol. If you need help doing that, you may want to see a therapist or participate in an alcohol recovery program. There are also medicines that can help, either by reducing your cravings or making you feel sick if you drink alcohol. Both alcoholic fatty liver disease and one type of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis) can lead to cirrhosis. Doctors can treat the health problems caused by cirrhosis with medicines, operations, and other medical procedures. If the cirrhosis leads to liver failure, you may need a liver transplant . What are some lifestyle changes that can help with fatty liver disease? If you have any of the types of fatty liver disease, there are some lifestyle changes that can help: Eat a healthy diet, limiting salt and sugar, plus eating lots of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains Get vaccinations for hepatitis A and B , the flu and pneumococcal disease . If you get hepatitis A or B along with fatty liver, it is more likely to lead to liver failure. People with chronic liver disease are more likely to get infections, so the other two vaccinations are also important. Get regular exercise , which can help you lose weight and reduce fat in the liver Talk with your doctor before using dietary supplements , such as vitamins , or any complementary or alternative medicines or medical practices . Some herbal remedies can damage your liver.

If you're like most people, you think that heart disease is a problem for others. But heart disease is the number one killer in the U.S. It is also a major cause of disability. There are many different forms of heart disease. The most common cause of heart disease is narrowing or blockage of the coronary arteries, the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart itself. This is called coronary artery disease and 
happens slowly over time. It's the major reason people have heart attacks . Other kinds of heart problems may happen to the valves in the heart, or the heart may not pump well and cause heart failure . Some people are born with heart disease. You can help reduce your risk of heart disease by taking steps to control factors that put you at greater risk: Control your blood pressure Lower your cholesterol Don't smoke Get enough exercise NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

What is an alcohol use disorder? An alcohol use disorder (AUD) is drinking that causes distress and harm. It is a medical condition in which you: Drink alcohol compulsively Can't control how much you drink Feel anxious, irritable, and/or stressed when you are not drinking An AUD can range from mild to severe, depending on the symptoms. Severe AUD is sometimes called alcoholism or alcohol dependence. What are the treatments for alcohol use disorder? Most people with an alcohol use disorder can benefit from some form of treatment. Medical treatments include medicines and behavioral therapies. For many people, using both types gives them the best results. People who are getting treatment for AUD may also find it helpful to go to a support group such as Alcoholics Anonymous (AA). If you have an AUD and a mental illness, it is important to get treatment for both. Some people may need intensive treatment for AUD. They may go to a residential treatment center for rehabilitation (rehab). Treatment there is highly structured. It usually includes several different kinds of behavioral therapies. It may also include medicines for detox (medical treatment for alcohol withdrawal) and/or for treating the AUD. Which medicines can treat alcohol use disorder? Three medicines are approved to treat AUD: Disulfiram causes unpleasant symptoms such as nausea and skin flushing whenever you drink alcohol. Knowing that drinking will cause these unpleasant effects may help you stay away from alcohol. Naltrexone blocks the receptors in your brain that make you feel good when you drink alcohol. It can also reduce your craving for alcohol. This can help you cut back on your drinking. Acamprosate helps you avoid alcohol after you have quit drinking. It works on multiple brain systems to reduce your cravings, especially just after you have quit drinking. Your health care provider can help you figure out if one of these medicines is right for you. They are not addictive, so you don't have to worry about trading one addiction for another. They are not a cure, but they can help you manage AUD. This is just like taking medicines to manage a chronic disease such as asthma or diabetes. Which behavioral therapies can treat alcohol use disorder? Another name for behavioral therapies for AUD is alcohol counseling. It involves working with a health care professional to identify and help change the behaviors that lead to your heavy drinking.: Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) helps you identify the feelings and situations that can lead to heavy drinking. It teaches you coping skills, including how to manage stress and how to change the thoughts that cause you to want to drink. You may get CBT one-on-one with a therapist or in small groups. Motivational enhancement therapy helps you build and strengthen the motivation to change your drinking behavior. It includes about four sessions over a short period of time. The therapy starts with identifying the pros and cons of seeking treatment. Then you and your therapist work on forming a plan for making changes in your drinking. The next sessions focus on building up your confidence and developing the skills you need to be able to stick to the plan. Marital and family counseling includes spouses and other family members. It can help to repair and improve your family relationships. Studies show that strong family support through family therapy may help you to stay away from drinking. Brief interventions are short, one-on-one or small-group counseling sessions. It includes one to four sessions. The counselor gives you information about your drinking pattern and potential risks. The counselor works with you to set goals and provide ideas that may help you make a change. Is treatment for alcohol use disorder effective? For most people, treatment for an AUD is helpful. But overcoming an alcohol use disorder is an ongoing process, and you may relapse (start drinking again). You should look at relapse as a temporary setback, and keep trying. Many people repeatedly try to cut back or quit drinking, have a setback, then try to quit again. Having a relapse does not mean that you cannot recover. If you do relapse, it is important to return to treatment right away, so you can learn more about your relapse triggers and improve your coping skills. This may help you be more successful the next time. NIH: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism



Alcohol use involves drinking beer, wine, or hard liquor.Alcohol is one of the most widely used drug substances in the world. TEEN DRINKING Alcohol use is not only an adult problem. Most American high school seniors have had an alcoholic drink within the past month. This is in spite of the fact that the legal drinking age is 21 years old in the United States. About 1 in 5 teens are considered "problem drinkers." This means that they: Get drunk Have accidents related to alcohol use Get into trouble with the law, family members, friends, school, or dates because of alcohol THE EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL Alcoholic drinks have different amounts of alcohol in them. Beer is about 5% alcohol, although some beers have more. Wine is usually 12% to 15% alcohol. Hard liquor is about 45% alcohol. Alcohol gets into your bloodstream quickly. The amount and type of food in your stomach can change how quickly this occurs. For example, high-carbohydrate and high-fat foods can make your body absorb alcohol more slowly. Certain types of alcoholic drinks get into your bloodstream faster. Stronger drinks tend to be absorbed faster. Alcohol slows your breathing rate, heart rate, and how well your brain functions. These effects may appear within 10 minutes and peak at around 40 to 60 minutes. Alcohol stays in your bloodstream until it is broken down by the liver. The amount of alcohol in your blood is called your blood alcohol level. If you drink alcohol faster than the liver can break it down, this level rises. Your blood alcohol level is used to legally define whether or not you are drunk. The legal limit for blood alcohol usually falls between 0.08 and 0.10 in most states. Below is a list of blood alcohol levels and the likely symptoms: 0.05 -- reduced inhibitions 0.10 -- slurred speech 0.20 -- euphoria and motor impairment 0.30 -- confusion 0.40 -- stupor 0.50 -- coma 0.60 -- breathing stops and death You can have symptoms of being drunk at blood alcohol levels below the legal definition of being drunk. Also, people who drink alcohol frequently may not have symptoms until a higher blood alcohol level is reached. HEALTH RISKS OF ALCOHOL Alcohol increases the risk of: Alcoholism Falls, drownings, and other accidents Head, neck, stomach, colon, breast, and other cancers Heart attack and stroke Motor vehicle accidents Risky sex behaviors, unplanned or unwanted pregnancy, and sexually transmitted infections (STIs) Suicide and homicide Drinking during pregnancy can harm the developing baby. Severe birth defects or fetal alcohol syndrome are possible. RESPONSIBLE DRINKING If you drink alcohol, it is best to do so in moderation. Moderation means the drinking is not getting you intoxicated (or drunk) and you are drinking no more than 1 drink per day if you are a woman and no more than 2 if you are a man. A drink is defined as 12 ounces (350 milliliters) of beer, 5 ounces (150 milliliters) of wine, or 1.5 ounces (45 milliliters) of liquor. Here are some ways to drink responsibly, provided you do not have a drinking problem, are of legal age to drink alcohol, and are not pregnant: Never drink alcohol and drive a car. If you are going to drink, have a designated driver, or plan an alternative way home, such as a taxi or bus. DO NOT drink on an empty stomach. Snack before and while drinking alcohol. If you are taking medicines, including over-the-counter drugs, check with your health care provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make the effects of many medicines stronger. It can also interact with other medicines, making them ineffective or dangerous or make you sick. If alcohol use runs in your family, you may be at increased risk of developing this disease yourself. So, you may want to avoid drinking alcohol altogether . CALL YOUR HEALTH CARE PROVIDER IF: You are concerned about your personal alcohol use or that of a family member You are interested in more information regarding alcohol use or support groups You are unable to reduce or stop your alcohol consumption, in spite of attempts to stop drinking Other resources include: Local Alcoholics Anonymous or Al-anon/Alateen groups Local hospitals Public or private mental health agencies School or work counselors Student or employee health centers

A breath alcohol test determines how much alcohol is in your blood. The test measures the amount of alcohol in the air you breathe out (exhale).There are many brands of breath alcohol tests. Each one uses a different method to test the level of alcohol in the breath. The machine may be electronic or manual. One common tester is the balloon type. You blow up the balloon with one breath until it is full. You then release the air into a glass tube. The tube is filled with bands of yellow crystals. The bands in the tube change colors (from yellow to green), depending on the alcohol content. Carefully read the instructions before using the test to make sure you get an accurate result. If an electronic alcohol meter is used, follow the instructions that come with the meter.

Alcoholic drinks, like many other drinks, contain calories that can add up quickly. Going out for a couple of drinks can add 500 calories, or more, to your daily intake. Most alcoholic drinks have little to no nutritional value. If you are trying to lose weight or maintain a healthy weight, you will want to watch how much you drink. Cocktails mixed with soda, juice, cream, or ice cream can have especially high calorie counts. If you find you are having trouble cutting back on alcohol , talk with your health care provider. Here is a list of some popular alcoholic beverages, their serving sizes, and the number of calories in each. Calorie count - alcoholic beverages BEVERAGE SERVING SIZE CALORIES Beer Beer (light) 12 oz (355 ml) 103 Beer (regular) 12 oz (355 ml) 153 Beer (higher alcohol, craft beers) 12 oz (355 ml) 170 to 350 Distilled Alcohol Gin (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Gin (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Rum (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Rum (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Vodka (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Vodka (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Whiskey (80 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 97 Whiskey (94 proof) 1.5 oz (45 ml) 116 Liqueurs Coffee liqueur 1.5 oz (45 ml) 160 Coffee liqueur with cream 1.5 oz (45 ml) 154 Crème de menthe 1.5 oz (45 ml) 186 Mixed Drinks Bloody Mary 4.6 oz (136 ml) 120 Chocolate martini 2.5 oz (74 ml) 418 Cosmopolitan 2.75 oz (81 ml) 146 Daiquiri 2.7 oz (80 ml) 137 Highball 8 oz (235 ml) 110 Hot buttered rum 8 oz (235 ml) 292 Mai Tai 4.9 oz (145 ml) 306 Margarita 4 oz (120 ml) 168 Mimosa 4 oz (120 ml) 75 Mint Julep 4.5 oz (135 ml) 165 Mojito 6 oz (177 ml) 143 Pina colada 6.8 oz (200 ml) 526 Rum and Coke 8 oz (235 ml) 185 Rum and Diet Coke 8 oz (235 ml) 100 Tequila sunrise 6.8 oz (200 ml) 232 Vodka and tonic 7 oz (207 ml) 189 Whiskey sour 3 oz (89 ml) 125 White Russian 8 oz (235 ml) 568 Wine White table wine 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Gewurztraminer 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Muscat 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Riesling 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Chenin Blanc 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Chardonnay 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Sauvignon Blanc 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Fume Blanc 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Pinot Grigio 5 oz (145 ml) 128 Dry dessert wine 3.5 oz (90 ml) 157 Red table wine 5 oz (145 ml) 125 Petite Sirah 5 oz (145 ml) 125 Merlot 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Cabernet Sauvignon 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Red Zinfandel 5 oz (145 ml) 129 Burgundy 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Pinot Noir 5 oz (145 ml) 121 Claret 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Syrah 5 oz (145 ml) 122 Red dessert wine 3.5 oz (90 ml) 165Weight loss - calorie count - alcoholic beverages; Overweight - calorie count - alcoholic beverages; Obesity - calorie count - alcoholic beverages

This article describes how to determine if you have a problem with alcohol use and offers advice on how to decide to quit drinking.Many people with drinking problems cannot tell when their drinking is out of control. You likely have a drinking problem when your body depends on alcohol to function and your drinking is causing problems with your health, social life, family, or job. Recognizing that you have a drinking problem is the first step toward being alcohol-free. Talk with your health care provider about your drinking. Your provider can help you find the best treatment.

Ethanol poisoning is caused by drinking too much alcohol. This article is for information only. DO NOT use it to treat or manage an actual poison exposure. If you or someone you are with has an exposure, call the local emergency number (such as 911), or your local poison center can be reached directly by calling the national toll-free Poison Help hotline (1-800-222-1222) from anywhere in the United States.Ethanol

Beer, wine, and liquor all contain alcohol. Drinking an excessive amount of alcohol can put you at risk for alcohol-related problems.Beer, wine, and liquor all contain alcohol. If you are drinking any of these, you are using alcohol. Your drinking patterns may vary, depending on who you are with and what you are doing. Drinking an excessive amount of alcohol can put you at risk for alcohol-related problems if: You are a man under 65 years old who has 15 or more drinks a week, or often have 5 or more drinks at a time. You are a woman or a man over 65 years old who has 8 or more drinks a week, or often have 4 or more drinks at a time. One drink is defined as 12 ounces (355 milliliters, mL) of beer, 5 ounces (148 mL) of wine, or a 1 1/2-ounce (44 mL) shot of liquor.

If you drink alcohol, health care providers advise limiting how much you drink. This is called drinking in moderation, or responsible drinking.Responsible drinking means more than just limiting yourself to a certain number of drinks. It also means not getting drunk and not letting alcohol control your life or your relationships.

If you are trying to lose weight, you can boost your efforts by cutting back on alcoholic drinks. Alcohol can cause weight gain in a couple of ways. First, alcohol is high in calories. Some mixed drinks can contain as many calories as a meal, but without the nutrients. Second, you also may make poor food choices when you drink. While you do not have to cut out all alcohol if you are trying to lose weight, you may need to make some changes. You should watch the number, and type, of drinks you choose. You will also want to keep an eye on how drinking affects your eating habits.So, how much can you drink if you are trying to lose weight? Health experts recommend that anyone who drinks should do so in moderation . This means no more than 1 drink per day for women and no more than 2 drinks per day for men. You may want to drink even less than that while dieting. Keep in mind that alcohol has empty calories. This means it has a lot of calories (7 per gram versus 4 per gram for carbohydrate and protein) but few nutrients. So in order to drink alcohol while cutting back on calories, you need to plan it into your daily calorie count so you do not go over. Also remember that when you drink alcohol, you are replacing potentially healthy, and filling, food with calories that will not fill you up. When choosing what to drink, you will want to choose your calories wisely. Here is a quick comparison of some common alcoholic drinks: Regular beer, about 150 calories for a 12-ounce (355 mL) glass Light beer, about 100 calories for a 12-ounce (355 mL) glass Wine, about 100 calories for a 5-ounce (145 mL) glass Distilled alcohol (gin, rum, vodka, whiskey), about 100 calories for a 1.5-ounce (45 mL) serving Martini (extra dry), about 140 calories for a 2.25-ounce (65 mL) glass Pina colada, about 500 calories in a 7-ounce (205 mL) glass Pay attention to what else goes in your drink. Many mixed drinks include juices, simple syrup, or liqueur, which all add extra calories. These calories can add up quickly. Look for lower calorie options, such as a splash of juice and soda water. You may want to skip mixed drinks completely and stick with beer or wine. Portion size is something else you should keep an eye on. Know what a standard drink looks like: 12 ounces (355 mL) of beer 5 ounces (145 mL) of wine 1.5 ounces (45 mL, or one shot) of hard liquor The sizes of alcoholic drinks at a restaurant or bar are often larger than the standard amounts listed above. In some cases, 1 drink may actually have 2 or more servings of alcohol and calories. If you are served a drink that is larger than the standard size, skip a second drink. At home, use a jigger when mixing drinks, and serve them in smaller glasses. It will feel like you are having more.

Many people with alcohol problems cannot tell when their drinking is out of control. It is important to be aware of how much you are drinking. You should also know how your alcohol use may affect your life and those around you. One drink equals one 12-ounce (oz), or 355 milliliters (mL), can or bottle of beer, one 5-ounce (148 mL) glass of wine, 1 wine cooler, 1 cocktail, or 1 shot of hard liquor. Think about: How often you have an alcoholic drink How many drinks you have when you do drink How any drinking you are doing affects your life or the lives of othersHere are some guidelines for drinking alcohol responsibly, as long as you do not have a drinking problem. Healthy men up to age 65 should limit themselves to: No more than 4 drinks in 1 day No more than 14 drinks in a week Healthy women up to age 65 should limit themselves to: No more than 3 drinks in 1 day No more than 7 drinks in a week Healthy women of all ages and healthy men over age 65 should limit themselves to: No more than 3 drinks in 1 day No more than 7 drinks in a week

Health care providers consider you to be drinking more than is medically safe when you: Are a healthy man up to age 65 and drink: 5 or more drinks on one occasion monthly, or even weekly More than 14 drinks in a week Are a healthy woman of all ages or a healthy man over age 65 and drink: 4 or more drinks on one occasion monthly, or even weekly More than 7 drinks in a weekWatch your drinking patterns more closely and plan ahead. This can help you cut back on your alcohol use. Keep track of how much you drink and set goals. Track how many drinks you have during the week on a small card in your wallet, on your calendar, or on your phone. Know how much alcohol is in a standard drink -- a 12 ounces (oz), or 355 milliliters (mL) can or bottle of beer, a 5 oz (148 mL) of wine, a wine cooler, 1 cocktail, or 1 shot of hard liquor. When you are drinking: Pace yourself. Have no more than 1 alcoholic drink per hour. Sip on water, soda, or juice in between alcoholic drinks. Eat something before drinking and in between drinks. To control how much you drink: Stay away from people or places that influence you to drink when you do not want to drink, or tempt you to drink more than you should. Plan other activities that do not involve drinking for days when you have the urge to drink. Keep alcohol out of your home. Make a plan to handle your urges to drink. Remind yourself of why you do not want to drink, or talk to someone you trust. Create a polite but firm way of refusing a drink when you are offered one.

Studies have shown that adults who drink light to moderate amounts of alcohol may be less likely to develop heart disease than those who do not drink at all or are heavy drinkers. However, people who do not drink alcohol should not start just because they want to avoid developing heart disease.There is a fine line between healthy drinking and risky drinking . Do not begin drinking or drink more often just to lower your risk of heart disease. Heavier drinking can harm the heart and liver. Heart disease is the leading cause of death in people who abuse alcohol. Health care providers recommend that if you drink alcohol, drink only light to moderate amounts: For men, limit alcohol to 1 to 2 drinks a day. For women, limit alcohol to 1 drink a day. One drink is defined as: 4 ounces (118 milliliters, mL) of wine 12 ounces (355 mL) of beer 1 1/2 ounces (44 mL) of 80-proof spirits 1 ounce (30 mL) of 100-proof spirits Though research has found that alcohol may help prevent heart disease, much more effective ways to prevent heart disease include: Controlling blood pressure and cholesterol Exercising and following a low-fat, healthy diet Not smoking Maintaining an ideal weight Anyone who has heart disease or heart failure should talk to their provider before drinking alcohol. Alcohol can make heart failure and other heart problems worse.





Alcohol can harm your baby at any stage during a pregnancy. That includes the earliest stages, before you even know you are pregnant. Drinking during pregnancy can cause a group of conditions called fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASDs). Children who are born with FASD can have a mix of problems, such as medical, behavioral, educational, and social problems. The kinds of problems they have depend on which type of FASD they have. The problems could include : Abnormal facial features, such as a smooth ridge between the nose and upper lip Small head size Shorter-than-average height Low body weight Poor coordination Hyperactive behavior Difficulty with attention and memory Learning disabilities and difficulty in school Speech and language delays Intellectual disability or low IQ Poor reasoning and judgment skills Sleep and sucking problems as a baby Vision or hearing problems Problems with the heart, kidneys, or bones Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) is the most serious type of FASD. People with fetal alcohol syndrome have facial abnormalities, including wide-set and narrow eyes, growth problems and nervous system abnormalities. Diagnosing FASD can be hard because there is no specific test for it. The health care provider will make a diagnosis by looking at the child's signs and symptoms and asking whether the mother drank alcohol during pregnancy. FASDs last a lifetime. There is no cure for FASDs, but treatments can help. These include medicines to help with some symptoms, medical care for health problems, behavior and education therapy, and parent training. A good treatment plan is specific to the child's problems. It should include close monitoring, follow-ups, and changes when needed. Certain "protective factors" can help reduce the effects of FASDs and help people who have them reach their full potential. They include: Diagnosis before 6 years of age Loving, nurturing, and stable home environment during the school years Absence of violence around them Involvement in special education and social services There is no known safe amount of alcohol during pregnancy. To prevent FASDs, you should not drink alcohol while you are pregnant, or when you might get pregnant. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention





