What is anxiety? Anxiety is a feeling of fear, dread, and uneasiness. It might cause you to sweat, feel restless and tense, and have a rapid heartbeat.   It can be a normal reaction to stress. For example, you might feel anxious when faced with a difficult problem at work, before taking a test, or before making an important decision. It can help you to cope. The anxiety may give you a boost of energy or help you focus. But for people with anxiety disorders, the fear is not temporary and can be overwhelming. What are anxiety disorders? Anxiety disorders are conditions in which you have anxiety that does not go away and can get worse over time. The symptoms can interfere with daily activities such as job performance, schoolwork, and relationships. What are the types of anxiety disorders? There are several types of anxiety disorders, including: Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). People with GAD worry about ordinary issues such as health, money, work, and family. But their worries are excessive, and they have them almost every day for at least 6 months. Panic disorder . People with panic disorder have panic attacks. These are sudden, repeated periods of intense fear when there is no danger. The attacks come on quickly and can last several minutes or more. Phobias . People with phobias have an intense fear of something that poses little or no actual danger. Their fear may be about spiders, flying, going to crowded places, or being in social situations (known as social anxiety). What causes anxiety disorders? The cause of anxiety is unknown. Factors such as genetics, brain biology and chemistry, stress , and your environment may play a role. Who is at risk for anxiety disorders? The risk factors for the different types of anxiety disorders can vary. For example, GAD and phobias are more common in women, but social anxiety affects men and women equally. There are some general risk factors for all types of anxiety disorders, including: Certain personality traits, such as being shy or withdrawn when you are in new situations or meeting new people Traumatic events in early childhood or adulthood Family history of anxiety or other mental disorders Some physical health conditions, such as thyroid problems or arrhythmia What are the symptoms of anxiety disorders? The different types of anxiety disorders can have different symptoms. But they all have a combination of: Anxious thoughts or beliefs that are hard to control. They make you feel restless and tense and interfere with your daily life. They do not go away and can get worse over time. Physical symptoms, such as a pounding or rapid heartbeat, unexplained aches and pains, dizziness , and shortness of breath Changes in behavior, such as avoiding everyday activities you used to do Using caffeine , other substances, and certain medicines can make your symptoms worse. How are anxiety disorders diagnosed? To diagnose anxiety disorders, your health care provider will ask about your symptoms and medical history. You may also have a physical exam and lab tests to make sure that a different health problem is not the cause of your symptoms. If you don't have another health problem, you will get a psychological evaluation . Your provider may do it, or you may be referred to a mental health professional to get one. What are the treatments for anxiety disorders? The main treatments for anxiety disorders are psychotherapy (talk therapy), medicines, or both: Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a type of psychotherapy that is often used to treat anxiety disorders. CBT teaches you different ways of thinking and behaving. It can help you change how you react to the things that cause you to feel fear and anxiety. It may include exposure therapy. This focuses on having you confront your fears so that you will be able to do the things that you had been avoiding. Medicines to treat anxiety disorders include anti-anxiety medicines and certain antidepressants . Some types of medicines may work better for specific types of anxiety disorders. You should work closely with your health care provider to identify which medicine is best for you. You may need to try more than one medicine before you can find the right one. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

Panic disorder is a type of anxiety disorder .  It causes panic attacks, which are sudden feelings of terror when there is no real danger.  You may feel as if you are losing control. You may also have physical symptoms, such as: Fast heartbeat Chest or stomach pain Breathing difficulty Weakness or dizziness Sweating Feeling hot or a cold chill Tingly or numb hands Panic attacks can happen anytime, anywhere, and without warning. You may live in fear of another attack and may avoid places where you have had an attack. For some people, fear takes over their lives and they cannot leave their homes. Panic disorder is more common in women than men.  It usually starts when people are young adults. Sometimes it starts when a person is under a lot of stress. Most people get better with treatment. Therapy can show you how to recognize and change your thinking patterns before they lead to panic.  Medicines can also help. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

A phobia is a type of anxiety disorder .  It is a strong, irrational fear of something that poses little or no real danger. There are many specific phobias. Acrophobia is a fear of heights. Agoraphobia is a fear of public places, and claustrophobia is a fear of closed-in places. If you become anxious and extremely self-conscious in everyday social situations, you could have a social phobia. Other common phobias involve tunnels, highway driving, water, flying, animals and blood. People with phobias try to avoid what they are afraid of. If they cannot, they may experience: Panic and fear Rapid heartbeat Shortness of breath Trembling A strong desire to get away Phobias usually start in children or teens, and continue into adulthood. The causes of specific phobias are not known, but they sometimes run in families. Treatment helps most people with phobias. Options include medicines, therapy or both. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What is stress? Stress is how your brain and body respond to a challenge or demand. When you are stressed, your body releases chemicals called hormones . The hormones make you alert and ready to act. They can raise your blood pressure, heart rate, and blood sugar levels. This response is sometimes called a "fight or flight" response. Everyone gets stressed from time to time. There are different types of stress. It can be short-term or long-term. It can be caused by something that happens once or something that keeps happening. Not all stress is bad. In fact, it can help you survive in a dangerous situation. For example, one kind of stress is the jolt you may feel when a car pulls out in front of you. This jolt of hormones helps you quickly hit the brakes to avoid an accident. A little short-term stress can sometimes be helpful. For example, the stress of having a deadline for school or your job may push you to get your work done on time. Once you finish it, that stress goes away. But stress that lasts a long time can harm your health. What causes long-term stress? Long-term stress, or chronic stress, lasts for weeks, months, or longer. As you go about your life, your body is acting as if you're being threatened. Causes of long-term stress include: Routine stress from the demands of work, school, family needs, money problems, and other daily pressures that don't stop. Stress from sudden, difficult changes in your life, such as divorce, illness, losing your job, or other unhappy life events that often have a long impact. Traumatic stress, which may happen when you're in danger of serious harm or death. Examples include being in a bad accident, a war, a flood, earthquake, or other frightening event. This type of stress can cause a long-lasting problem called post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). How can long term-stress harm my health? People respond to stress in different ways. If you're stressed for a long time you may notice that you are: Getting sick more often than usual because stress weakens your body's ability to fight germs Having stomach problems or trouble digesting food Having trouble sleeping Having headaches Feeling sad, angry, or easily upset When stress keeps going, your body acts as if you're always in danger. That's a lot of strain that may play a part in developing serious health problems, including: Depression Anxiety Heart disease High blood pressure Diabetes (high blood sugar) It's possible to get used to the symptoms of stress and not even realize there's a problem. So when there's a lot of stress in your life, it's important to pay attention to how it affects you so you can do something about it. How can I manage long-term stress? Simple things that improve your mental health may be helpful in managing long-term stress, such as: Get regular exercise. A 30-minute daily walk can help you feel better and help keep your immune system strong, so you don't get sick. Try relaxing activities. You could look for an app or wellness program that uses breathing, meditation, or muscle relaxation exercises. Get enough sleep every night. Avoid too much caffeine . Decide what you need to do now and what can wait. And focus on what you got done each day, not on what you weren't able to do. Ask your family or friends for support. When should I ask my health care provider for help with stress? Get help if you're having severe symptoms for 2 weeks or more, including: Trouble sleeping Changes in your eating that cause unwanted changes in your weight Troubles getting out of bed because of your mood Difficulty focusing your thoughts Losing interest in things you usually enjoy Not being able to do your usual daily activities Always get help right away if stress is causing you to: Have thoughts of harming yourself Feel you can't cope Use drugs or alcohol more often than usual Your health care provider may refer you to a mental health professional such as a psychologist or social worker. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health

What are mental disorders? Mental disorders (or mental illnesses) are conditions that affect your thinking, feeling, mood, and behavior. They may be occasional or long-lasting (chronic). They can affect your ability to relate to others and function each day. What are some types of mental disorders? There are many different types of mental disorders. Some common ones include: Anxiety disorders , including panic disorder , obsessive-compulsive disorder , and phobias Depression , bipolar disorder , and other mood disorders Eating disorders Personality disorders Post-traumatic stress disorder Psychotic disorders , including schizophrenia What causes mental disorders? There is no single cause for mental illness. A number of factors can contribute to risk for mental illness, such as: Your genes and family history Your life experiences, such as stress or a history of abuse, especially if they happen in childhood Biological factors such as chemical imbalances in the brain A traumatic brain injury A mother's exposure to viruses or toxic chemicals while pregnant Use of alcohol or recreational drugs Having a serious medical condition like cancer Having few friends, and feeling lonely or isolated Mental disorders are not caused by character flaws. They have nothing to do with being lazy or weak. Who is at risk for mental disorders? Mental disorders are common. More than half of all Americans will be diagnosed with a mental disorder at some time in their life. How are mental disorders diagnosed? The steps to getting a diagnosis include: A medical history A physical exam and possibly lab tests, if your provider thinks that other medical conditions could be causing your symptoms A psychological evaluation . You will answer questions about your thinking, feelings, and behaviors. What are the treatments for mental disorders? Treatment depends on which mental disorder you have and how serious it is. You and your provider will work on a treatment plan just for you. It usually involves some type of therapy. You may also take medicines. Some people also need social support and education on managing their condition. In some cases, you may need more intensive treatment. You may need to go to a psychiatric hospital.  This could be because your mental illness is severe. Or it could be because you are at risk of hurting yourself or someone else. In the hospital, you will get counseling, group discussions, and activities with mental health professionals and other patients.

Your thyroid is a butterfly-shaped gland in your neck, just above your collarbone.  It is one of your endocrine glands, which make hormones.  Thyroid hormones control the rate of many activities in your body. These include how fast you burn calories and how fast your heart beats. All of these activities are your body's metabolism. Thyroid problems include: Goiter - enlargement of the thyroid gland Hyperthyroidism - when your thyroid gland makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs Hypothyroidism - when your thyroid gland does not make enough thyroid hormones Thyroid cancer Thyroid nodules - lumps in the thyroid gland Thyroiditis - swelling of the thyroid To diagnose thyroid diseases, doctors use a medical history, physical exam, and thyroid tests . They sometimes also use a biopsy. Treatment depends on the problem, but may include medicines, radioiodine therapy, or thyroid surgery. Dept. of Health and Human Services Office on Women's Health

An arrhythmia is a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat. It means that your heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern. When the heart beats faster than normal, it is called tachycardia. When the heart beats too slowly, it is called bradycardia. The most common type of arrhythmia is atrial fibrillation , which causes an irregular and fast heart beat. Many factors can affect your heart's rhythm, such as having had a heart attack , smoking, congenital heart defects , and stress. Some substances or medicines may also cause arrhythmias. Symptoms of arrhythmias include: Fast or slow heart beat Skipping beats Lightheadedness or dizziness Chest pain Shortness of breath Sweating Your doctor can run tests to find out if you have an arrhythmia. Treatment to restore a normal heart rhythm may include medicines, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) or pacemaker , or sometimes surgery. NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

When you're dizzy, you may feel lightheaded, woozy, or disoriented. If you feel like you or the room are spinning, you have vertigo. These feelings may make you lose your balance . Dizziness can have many different causes. A sudden drop in blood pressure or being dehydrated can make you dizzy. Many people feel lightheaded if they get up too quickly from sitting or lying down. Certain medicines and problems with your inner ear may cause dizziness. So can motion sickness . Sometimes dizziness can be a symptom of other disorders. As people get older, they may have more health problems and take more medicines. This makes them more likely to have problems with dizziness and balance. Dizziness usually gets better by itself or is easily treated. If you are dizzy often, you should see your health care provider to find the cause. NIH: National Institutes of Health

When you're short of breath, it's hard or uncomfortable for you to take in the oxygen your body needs. You may feel as if you're not getting enough air. Sometimes you can have mild breathing problems because of a stuffy nose or intense exercise. But shortness of breath can also be a sign of a serious disease. Many conditions can make you feel short of breath: Lung conditions such as asthma , emphysema , or pneumonia Problems with your trachea or bronchi , which are part of your airway system Heart disease can make you feel breathless if your heart cannot pump enough blood to supply oxygen to your body Anxiety and panic attacks Allergies If you often have trouble breathing, it is important to find out the cause.

What is caffeine? Caffeine is a bitter substance that occurs naturally in more than 60 plants including: Coffee beans Tea leaves Kola nuts, which are used to flavor soft drink colas Cacao pods, which are used to make chocolate products There is also synthetic (man-made) caffeine, which is added to some medicines, foods, and drinks. For example, some pain relievers, cold medicines, and over-the-counter medicines for alertness contain synthetic caffeine. So do energy drinks and "energy-boosting" gums and snacks. Most people consume caffeine from drinks. The amount of caffeine in different drinks can vary a lot, but it is generally: An 8-ounce cup of coffee: 95-200 mg A 12-ounce can of cola: 35-45 mg An 8-ounce energy drink: 70-100 mg An 8-ounce cup of tea: 14-60 mg What are caffeine's effects on the body? Caffeine has many effects on your body's metabolism. It: Stimulates your central nervous system, which can make you feel more awake and give you a boost of energy Is a diuretic, meaning that it helps your body get rid of extra salt and water by urinating more Increases the release of acid in your stomach, sometimes leading to an upset stomach or heartburn May interfere with the absorption of calcium in the body Increases your blood pressure Within one hour of eating or drinking caffeine, it reaches its peak level in your blood. You may continue to feel the effects of caffeine for four to six hours. What are the side effects from too much caffeine? For most people, it is not harmful to consume up to 400mg of caffeine a day. If you do eat or drink too much caffeine, it can cause health problems, such as: Restlessness and shakiness Insomnia Headaches Dizziness Fast heart rate Dehydration Anxiety Dependency, so you need to take more of it to get the same results Some people are more sensitive to the effects of caffeine than others. What are energy drinks, and why can they be a problem? Energy drinks are beverages that have added caffeine. The amount of caffeine in energy drinks can vary widely, and sometimes the labels on the drinks do not give you the actual amount of caffeine in them. Energy drinks may also contain sugars, vitamins, herbs, and supplements. Companies that make energy drinks claim that the drinks can increase alertness and improve physical and mental performance. This has helped make the drinks popular with American teens and young adults. There's limited data showing that energy drinks might temporarily improve alertness and physical endurance. There is not enough evidence to show that they enhance strength or power. But what we do know is that energy drinks can be dangerous because they have large amounts of caffeine. And since they have lots of sugar, they can contribute to weight gain and worsen diabetes. Sometimes young people mix their energy drinks with alcohol. It is dangerous to combine alcohol and caffeine. Caffeine can interfere with your ability to recognize how drunk you are, which can lead you to drink more. This also makes you more likely to make bad decisions. Who should avoid or limit caffeine? You should check with your health care provider about whether you should limit or avoid caffeine if you: Are pregnant , since caffeine passes through the placenta to your baby. Are breastfeeding , since a small amount of caffeine that you consume is passed along to your baby. Have sleep disorders , including insomnia. Have migraines or other chronic headaches. Have anxiety. Have GERD or ulcers . Have arrhythmia (a problem with the rate or rhythm of your heartbeat). Have high blood pressure . Take certain medicines or supplements, including stimulants, certain antibiotics , asthma medicines, and heart medicines. Check with your health care provider about whether there might be interactions between caffeine and any medicines and supplements that you take. Are a child or teen. Neither should have as much caffeine as adults. Children can be especially sensitive to the effects of caffeine. What is caffeine withdrawal? If you have been consuming caffeine on a regular basis and then suddenly stop, you may have caffeine withdrawal. Symptoms can include: Headaches Drowsiness Irritability Nausea Trouble concentrating These symptoms usually go away after a couple of days.

What is a mental health screening? A mental health screening is an exam of your emotional health. It helps find out if you have a mental disorder . Mental disorders are common. They affect more than half of all Americans at some point in their lives. There are many types of mental disorders. Some of the most common disorders include: Depression and mood disorders. These mental disorders are different than normal sadness or grief. They can cause extreme sadness, anger, and/or frustration. Anxiety disorders. Anxiety can cause excessive worry or fear at real or imagined situations. Eating disorders . These disorders cause obsessive thoughts and behaviors related to food and body image. Eating disorders may cause people to severely limit the amount of food they eat, excessively overeat (binge), or do a combination of both. Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) . ADHD is one of the most common mental disorders in children. It can also continue into adulthood. People with ADHD have trouble paying attention and controlling impulsive behavior. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) . This disorder can happen after you live through a traumatic life event, such as a war or serious accident. People with PTSD feel stressed and afraid, even long after the danger is over. Substance abuse and addictive disorders. These disorders involve excessive use of alcohol or drugs . People with substance abuse disorders are at risk for overdose and death. Bipolar disorder , formerly called manic depression. People with bipolar disorder have alternating episodes of mania (extreme highs) and depression. Schizophrenia and psychotic disorders . These are among the most serious psychiatric disorders. They can cause people to see, hear, and/or believe things that aren't real. The effects of mental disorders range from mild to severe to life-threatening. Fortunately, many people with mental disorders can be successfully treated with medicine and/or talk therapy. Other names: mental health assessment, mental illness test, psychological evaluation, psychology test, psychiatric evaluation What is it used for? A mental health screening is used to help diagnose mental disorders. Your primary care provider may use a mental health screening to see if you need to go to a mental health provider. A mental health provider is a health care professional that specializes in diagnosing and treating mental health problems. If you are already seeing a mental health provider, you may get a mental health screening to help guide your treatment. Why do I need a mental health screening? You may need a mental health screening if you have symptoms of a mental disorder. Symptoms vary depending on the type of disorder, but common signs may include: Excessive worrying or fear Extreme sadness Major changes in personality, eating habits, and/or sleeping patterns Dramatic mood swings Anger, frustration, or irritability Fatigue and lack of energy Confused thinking and trouble concentrating Feelings of guilt or worthlessness Avoidance of social activities One of the most serious signs of a mental disorder is thinking about or attempting suicide . If you are thinking about hurting yourself or about suicide, seek help right away. There are many ways to get help. You can: Call 911 or your local emergency room Call your mental health provider or other health care provider Reach out to a loved one or close friend Call a suicide hotline. In the United States, you can call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (1-800-273-8255) If you are a veteran, call the Veterans Crisis Line at 1-800-273-8255 or send a text to 838255 What happens during a mental health screening? Your primary care provider may give you a physical exam and ask you about your feelings, mood, behavior patterns, and other symptoms. Your provider may also order a blood test to find out if a physical disorder, such as thyroid disease , may be causing mental health symptoms. During a blood test, a health care professional will take a blood sample from a vein in your arm, using a small needle. After the needle is inserted, a small amount of blood will be collected into a test tube or vial. You may feel a little sting when the needle goes in or out. This usually takes less than five minutes. If you are being tested by a mental health provider, he or she may ask you more detailed questions about your feelings and behaviors. You may also be asked to fill out a questionnaire about these issues. Will I need to do anything to prepare for a mental health screening? You don't need any special preparations for a mental health screening. Are there any risks to screening? There is no risk to having a physical exam or taking a questionnaire. There is very little risk to having a blood test. You may have slight pain or bruising at the spot where the needle was put in, but most symptoms go away quickly. What do the results mean? If you are diagnosed with a mental disorder, it's important to get treatment as soon as possible. Treatment may help prevent long-term suffering and disability. Your specific treatment plan will depend on the type of disorder you have and how serious it is. Is there anything else I need to know about a mental health screening? There are many types of providers who treat mental disorders. The most common types of mental health providers include: Psychiatrist , a medical doctor who specializes in mental health. Psychiatrists diagnose and treat mental health disorders. They can also prescribe medicine. Psychologist , a professional trained in psychology. Psychologists generally have doctoral degrees. But they do not have medical degrees. Psychologists diagnose and treat mental health disorders. They offer one-on-one counseling and/or group therapy sessions. They can't prescribe medicine, unless they have a special license. Some psychologists work with providers who are able to prescribe medicine. Licensed clinical social worker (L.C.S.W.) has a master's degree in social work with training in mental health. Some have additional degrees and training. L.C.S.W.s diagnose and provide counseling for a variety of mental health problems. They can't prescribe medicine, but can work with providers who are able to. Licensed professional counselor. (L.P.C.). Most L.P.C.s have a master's degree. But training requirements vary by state. L.P.C.s diagnose and provide counseling for a variety of mental health problems. They can't prescribe medicine, but can work with providers who are able to. Advanced practice registered nurses (APRNs) are specially trained nurses who have a master’s or doctoral degree in psychiatric nursing. They assess, diagnose, and treat a variety of mental health disorders. Some ARPNs can prescribe medicines. C.S.W.s and L.P.C.s may be known by other names, including therapist, clinician, or counselor. If you don't know which type of mental health provider you should see, talk to your primary care provider. References American Psychiatric Nurses Association [Internet]. Falls Church (VA): American Psychiatric Nurses Association; Psychiatric Mental Health Nurses; [cited 2021 Aug 2]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.apna.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?pageid=3292 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [Internet]. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Learn About Mental Health; [updated 2018 Jan 26; cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/mentalhealth/learn Mayo Clinic [Internet]. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; c1998–2018. Mental health providers: Tips on finding one; 2017 May 16 [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mental-illness/in-depth/mental-health-providers/art-20045530 Mayo Clinic [Internet]. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; c1998–2018. Mental illness: Diagnosis and treatment; 2015 Oct 13 [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 4 screens]. Available from: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mental-illness/diagnosis-treatment/drc-20374974 Mayo Clinic [Internet]. Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research; c1998–2018. Mental illness: Symptoms and causes; 2015 Oct 13 [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/mental-illness/symptoms-causes/syc-20374968 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c1995–2018. Mental Health Assessment: How It Is Done; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 5 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756#tp16780 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c1995–2018. Mental Health Assessment: Results; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 8 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756#tp16783 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c1995–2018. Mental Health Assessment: Test Overview; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756 Michigan Medicine: University of Michigan [Internet]. Ann Arbor (MI): Regents of the University of Michigan; c1995–2018. Mental Health Assessment: Why It Is Done; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.uofmhealth.org/health-library/aa79756#tp16778 Merck Manual Consumer Version [Internet]. Kenilworth (NJ): Merck & Co. Inc.; c2018. Overview of Mental Illness; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.merckmanuals.com/home/mental-health-disorders/overview-of-mental-health-care/overview-of-mental-illness National Alliance on Mental Illness [Internet]. Arlington (VA): NAMI; c2018. Know the Warning Signs [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Know-the-Warning-Signs National Alliance on Mental Illness [Internet]. Arlington (VA): NAMI; c2018. Mental Health Screening; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Mental-Health-Public-Policy/Mental-Health-Screening National Alliance on Mental Illness [Internet]. Arlington (VA): NAMI; c2018. Types of Mental Health Professionals; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nami.org/Learn-More/Treatment/Types-of-Mental-Health-Professionals National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Blood Tests; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-topics/blood-tests National Institute of Mental Health [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Eating Disorders; [updated 2016 Feb; cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/eating-disorders/index.shtml National Institute of Mental Health [Internet]. Bethesda (MD): U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Mental Illness; [updated 2017 Nov; cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 3 screens]. Available from: https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/statistics/mental-illness.shtml University of Rochester Medical Center [Internet]. Rochester (NY): University of Rochester Medical Center; c2018. Health Encyclopedia: Comprehensive Psychiatric Evaluation; [cited 2018 Oct 19]; [about 2 screens]. Available from: https://www.urmc.rochester.edu/encyclopedia/content.aspx?contenttypeid=85&contentid=P00752 Show references

What are antidepressants? Antidepressants are prescription medicines to treat depression. Depression is more than feeling a little sad or "blue" for a few days. It's a very common, serious medical illness that affects your mood and general mental health It can make you feel tired, hopeless, worried, or fearful. It can change your thinking, sleeping, and eating. Depression may make some people think about ending their lives. But antidepressants can help many people who have depression. Researchers think antidepressants may help improve the way your brain uses certain chemicals that control mood or stress. Are antidepressants used for other conditions? A health care provider may prescribe antidepressants for anxiety , chronic pain , or insomnia . Sometimes providers also prescribe antidepressants for other conditions. What are the different types of antidepressants? There are many types of antidepressants. Each one works differently. Providers usually prescribe newer antidepressants first because they don't cause as many side effects as older types. They also seem to help more kinds of depression and anxiety problems. Most of the newer antidepressants belong to one of these three groups: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) Serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs) Atypical antidepressants, which are newer antidepressants that don't fit into the other groups If these antidepressants don't help, your provider might suggest one of the older antidepressants. The older types include tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs), tetracyclics, and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). Even though these antidepressants may cause more serious side effects, the benefits may outweigh the risks for some people. Which type of antidepressant is right for me? Our bodies and brains all work differently. That means one antidepressant won't work for everyone.  You may need to try two or more medicines before you find one that works for you. Your provider will work with you to choose the best option to try first. You'll consider questions such as: Which symptoms bother you most? Some antidepressants may do a better job helping specific symptoms, such as trouble sleeping. What other medicines and supplements do you take? Some antidepressants can cause problems if you take them with certain medicines and herbs. Did a certain antidepressant work well for a close relative? An antidepressant that helped a parent, brother, or sister could be a good choice for you, too. Do you have other health conditions? Certain antidepressants can make some other conditions better or worse. Any other conditions that you have will be part of choosing your depression treatment. Are you pregnant, planning for pregnancy, or breastfeeding? If so, your provider will help you find a way to treat your depression that's safe for you and your baby. How long do antidepressants take to work? Antidepressants usually take 4 to 8 weeks to work, so you'll need to be patient. You may notice that some problems, such as sleeping and eating, get better before your mood improves. That's a good sign. You may just need to give the medicine a little more time to do its job. Sometimes an antidepressant helps at first, but symptoms return while you're still taking it. But there's usually another one you can try. To get more relief from depression, your provider may suggest combining two antidepressants, using another kind of medicine with an antidepressant, or adding talk therapy or other approaches to improve your mental health . How long will I need to take an antidepressant? When an antidepressant starts to work, you and your provider can decide how long you need to stay on it. The typical length of treatment is 6 to 12 months, but some people may stay on antidepressants for much longer. What are the side effects of antidepressants? Not everyone has side effects from antidepressants. But if you do have them, they're usually mild and may get better over time as your body gets used to the new medicine. The most common side effects from antidepressants include: Nausea and vomiting Weight gain Diarrhea Sleepiness Sexual problems, such as a lack of desire or ability to have sex When thinking about side effects, it's important to remember that there are also risks from not treating depression. Your provider can help you think through the pros and cons of all your options. If you have any side effects from antidepressants, your provider may suggest ways to manage them while you wait to see if the antidepressant will work. If the side effects bother you too much, you may need to change antidepressants. But you should never change your dose or stop taking an antidepressant on your own. If you have serious problems or notice any changes that worry you, such as new or worsening symptoms, unusual changes in your mood, or you start acting differently, call your provider right away. In some cases, children, teenagers, and young adults under 25 may be more likely to think about hurting or killing themselves when starting antidepressants or when the dose is changed. Get medical help right away if this happens. What can I do to take antidepressants safely? Antidepressants are generally safe when you use them correctly: Tell your provider about everything you take. That includes medicines, herbs, supplements, and over-the-counter medicines you take, such as pain relievers and decongestants. Be honest about recreational drugs and alcohol, too. Try to get all your medicines from the same pharmacy. That way the pharmacist can warn you and your provider if you take medicines that may cause problems when used together. Follow all instructions about how to take your medicine. Talk with your provider if side effects bother you. Never stop taking antidepressants without your provider's help. Stopping too fast may make depression come back. You could even make your condition worse. To stop antidepressants safely, you need to give your body time to get used to being without the medicine. Your provider can tell you the safest way to go off an antidepressant. NIH: National Institute of Mental Health



Agitation is an unpleasant state of extreme arousal. An agitated person may feel stirred up, excited, tense, confused, or irritable.Agitation can come on suddenly or over time. It can last for a few minutes, for weeks, or even months. Pain, stress, and fever can all increase agitation. Agitation by itself may not be a sign of a health problem. But if other symptoms occur, it can be a sign of disease. Agitation with a change in alertness (altered consciousness) can be a sign of delirium . Delirium has a medical cause and should be checked by a health care provider right away.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental disorder in which a person is often worried or anxious about many things and finds it hard to control this anxiety.The cause of GAD is unknown. Genes may play a role. Stress may also contribute to the development of GAD. GAD is a common condition. Anyone can develop this disorder, even children . GAD occurs more often in women than in men.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental disorder in which a child is often worried or anxious about many things and finds it hard to control this anxiety.The cause of GAD is unknown. Genes may play a role. Children with family members who have an anxiety disorder also may be more likely to have one. Stress may be a factor in developing GAD. Things in a child's life that can cause stress and anxiety include: Loss, such as death of a loved one or parents' divorce Big life changes, such as moving to a new town A history of abuse Living with family with members who are fearful, anxious, or violent GAD is a common condition, affecting about 2% to 6% of children. GAD usually does not occur until puberty. It is more often seen in girls than in boys.

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) is a mental condition in which you're frequently worried or anxious about many things. Your anxiety may seem out of control and get in the way of everyday activities. The right treatment can often improve GAD. You and your health care provider should make a treatment plan that could include talk therapy (psychotherapy), taking medicine, or both.Your provider may prescribe one or more medicines, including: An antidepressant, which can help with anxiety and depression. This kind of medicine may take weeks or months to start working. It is a safe medium- to long-term treatment for GAD. A benzodiazepine, which acts faster than an antidepressant to control anxiety. However, benzodiazepines can become less effective and habit forming over time. Your provider may prescribe a benzodiazepine to help your anxiety while you wait for the antidepressant to work. When taking medicine for GAD: Keep your provider informed about your symptoms. If a medicine isn't controlling symptoms, its dosage may need to be changed, or you may need to try a new medicine instead. Do not change the dosage or stop taking the medicine without talking to your provider. Take medicine at set times. For example, take it every day at breakfast. Check with your provider about the best time to take your medicine. Ask your provider about side effects and what to do if they occur.

Hyperventilation is rapid and deep breathing. It is also called overbreathing, and it may leave you feeling breathless.You breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide. Excessive breathing creates a low level of carbon dioxide in your blood. This causes many of the symptoms of hyperventilation. You may hyperventilate from an emotional cause such as during a panic attack. Or, it can be due to a medical problem, such as bleeding or infection. Your health care provider will determine the cause of your hyperventilation. Rapid breathing may be a medical emergency and you need to get treated, unless you have had this before and your provider has told you that you can treat it on your own. If you frequently overbreathe, you may have a medical problem called hyperventilation syndrome. When you're overbreathing, you might not be aware you're breathing fast and deep. But you'll likely be aware of the other symptoms, including: Feeling lightheaded, dizzy, weak, or not able to think straight Feeling as if you can't catch your breath Chest pain or fast and pounding heartbeat Belching or bloating Dry mouth Muscle spasms in the hands and feet Numbness and tingling in the arms or around the mouth Problems sleeping

It is normal for someone who is sick to feel uneasy, restless, afraid, or anxious. Certain thoughts, pain, or trouble breathing may trigger these feelings. Palliative care providers can help the person cope with these symptoms and feelings.Palliative care is a holistic approach to care that focuses on treating pain and symptoms and improving quality of life in people with serious illnesses and a limited life span.

Separation anxiety in children is a developmental stage in which the child is anxious when separated from the primary caregiver (usually the mother).As infants grow, their emotions and reactions to the world around them seem to occur in a predictable order. Before 8 months, infants are so new to the world that they lack a sense of what is normal and safe and what may be dangerous. As a result, new settings or people seem to not frighten them. From 8 to 14 months, children often become frightened when they meet new people or visit new places. They recognize their parents as familiar and safe. When separated from their parents, they feel threatened and unsafe. Separation anxiety is a normal stage as a child grows and develops. It helped keep our ancestors alive and helps children learn how to master the world around them. It usually ends when the child is around 2 years old. At this age, toddlers begin to understand that parents may be out of sight now, but will return later. It's also normal for them to test their independence. To get over separation anxiety, children need to: Feel safe in their home. Trust people other than their parents. Trust that their parents will return. Even after children have mastered this stage, separation anxiety may return in times of stress. Most children will feel some degree of separation anxiety when in unfamiliar situations, most often when separated from their parents. When children are in situations (such as hospitals) and are under stress (such as illness or pain), they seek the safety, comfort, and protection of their parents. Since anxiety can worsen pain, staying with a child as much as possible can reduce the pain.

Stress is a feeling of emotional or physical tension. It can come from any event or thought that makes you feel frustrated, angry, or nervous. Stress is your body's reaction to a challenge or demand. In short bursts, stress can be positive, such as when it helps you avoid danger or meet a deadline. But when stress lasts for a long time, it may harm your health.Stress is a normal feeling. There are two main types of stress: Acute stress. This is short-term stress that goes away quickly. You feel it when you slam on the brakes, have a fight with your partner, or ski down a steep slope. It helps you manage dangerous situations. It also occurs when you do something new or exciting. All people have acute stress at one time or another. Chronic stress. This is stress that lasts for a longer period of time. You may have chronic stress if you have money problems, an unhappy marriage, or trouble at work. Any type of stress that goes on for weeks or months is chronic stress. You can become so used to chronic stress that you don't realize it is a problem. If you don't find ways to manage stress , it may lead to health problems. STRESS AND YOUR BODY Your body reacts to stress by releasing hormones. These hormones make your brain more alert, cause your muscles to tense, and increase your pulse. In the short term, these reactions are good because they can help you handle the situation causing stress. This is your body's way of protecting itself. When you have chronic stress, your body stays alert, even though there is no danger. Over time, this puts you at risk for health problems, including: High blood pressure Heart disease Diabetes Obesity Depression or anxiety Skin problems, such as acne or eczema Menstrual problems If you already have a health condition, chronic stress can make it worse. SIGNS OF TOO MUCH STRESS Stress can cause many types of physical and emotional symptoms. Sometimes, you may not realize these symptoms are caused by stress. Here are some signs that stress may be affecting you: Diarrhea or constipation Forgetfulness Frequent aches and pains Headaches Lack of energy or focus Sexual problems Stiff jaw or neck Tiredness Trouble sleeping or sleeping too much Upset stomach Use of alcohol or drugs to relax Weight loss or gain









